‫ﺑَِﺪاﯾَُﺔ اﻟ َﻌﺎﺑِِﺪ َو ِﻛَﻔﺎﯾَُﺔ اﻟ ﱠﺰا ِﻫِﺪ‬
Bidāyat al-ʿĀbid wa Kifāyat al-Zāhid
Commencement of the Worshiper & Sufficiency of the Ascetic
ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. ʿAbd Allāh al-Baʿli (1110-1192 H)
Translation & Annotation by
John N. Starling, III Edition 2.3, Ramaḍān 1440 | May 2019 Copyright © 20 17 by John Starling

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced in any language, stored in any retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any means, whether electronic, mechanic, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without express permission of the copyright owner.
ISBN: 978-0692960578
Contents Foreword Preface Introduction to the Second Edition About the Author Purification
Istinjāʾ, Istijmār, Manners of the Restroom Personal Hygiene Wuḍūʾ Wiping the Khuff Invalidators of Wuḍūʾ Ghusl Tayammum Removal of Najāsah Various Impurities Blood of Women Prayer Adhān and Iqāmah Prerequisites, Pillars, Obligations, Recommendations Prostration of Forgetfulness Recommended Prayers Prohibited Times Congregational Prayer

Imāmship Excused from Congregation Prayer of the Ill Shortening Prayer Combining Prayer Fear Prayer Friday Prayer Friday Prayer Location ‘Eid Prayers Takbīr of ʿEid Eclipse Prayer Rain Prayer Funerals Washing Shrouding Funeral Prayer Burial Condolences Zakāt Cattle & Sheep Earthly Yield Gold & Silver Fitṛ Distribution Charity Fasting Obligations, Breaking the Fast, Intention Fast Invalidators Expiations & Recommended Acts Voluntary Fasting

Iʿttikāf Ḥajj
Miqāts Iḥrām & Ḥajj Types Prohibitions of Iḥrām Expiations Appraisal of Game Animals Sanctuary of Makkah & Madinah Entering Makkah Description of Ḥajj & ʿUmrah Minā & Madīnah Pillars & Obligations of Ḥajj Hady, Uḍḥiyah & ʿAqīqah Distribution of Hady ʿAqīqah Military Service Recruitment & Spoils Booty Pacts Breaking Pacts Conclusion Bibliography About the Translator

‫َﻣْﺬ َﻫ ُﺐ أَ ْﺣَﻤَﺪ أَ ْﺣَﻤُﺪ َﻣْﺬ َﻫ ٍﺐ‬ Aḥmad’s school is the most praiseworthy.
Abū Ismāʿīl al-Anṣāri 396-481
Foreword In the name of Allāh, the Most - Generous the Most - Merciful . All praise belongs to Allāh, the Lord of the worlds, and may peace and prayers be upon our Prophet Muḥammad, his family, companions, and all that follow them in the best manner until the Day of Judgment.
Seeking religious knowledge is from the most virtuous ways Muslims can spend their time. Accordingly, granting people access to it in a simple and easy manner, especially those who do not speak Arabic, is from the best of deeds.
The lofty aspirations of our virtuous brother Shaykh Abu Ibrāhīm John Starling, from the United States of America, has led to the English translation of Bidāyat al-ʿĀbid wa Kifāyat al-Zāhid by the Imām ʿAbd alRaḥmān b. ʿAbd Allāh al-Baʿli al-Ḥanbalī. This is extremely important work due to the lack of translated Fiqh books, especially concise juristic manuals.
Shaykh Abu Ibrāhīm has studied this manual, coordinated through ‘WhatsApp’, and received an ijāzah from the penurious servant. I ask that Allāh bless his efforts and benefit the Muslims from his work.
Dr. Mutḷaq b. Jāsir b. Mutḷaq al-Jāsir Department of Comparative Fiqh Faculty of Sharia, University of Kuwait Ramaḍān 25, 1438 H

Preface The following is a dual language presentation of Imām al-Baʿli’s, Bidāyat al-ʿĀbid wa Kifāyat al-Zāhid. I have relied upon the author’s explanation as a primary reference during the translation process. On occasion, I have given precedence to Shaykh Dr. Mutḷaq al-Jāsir’s commentary and corrections of the published text.
I have tried to make this manual as accessible to the reader as possible, while maintaining the codified nature of the original text. The untrained reader will require a qualified teacher to unlock its code. I have intentionally avoided adding additions, explanations between brackets, and footnotes unless I felt it necessary, such as with many of the chapter headings. My hope with this translation is to encourage students to learn Arabic as well as to acquaint themselves with the Ḥanbalī school, the style of the jurist, and revive the master/apprentice relationship in scholarship.
I would like to thank Shaykh Dr. Mutḷaq al-Jāsir for teaching me this text, writing the foreword, and for his service to Islām and the Ḥanbali school. I ask that Allāh reward him immensely and grant him success in this life and the next. I must also thank my good friend and colleague Shaykh Rashīd Aḥmadi for painstakingly reviewing the translation with me multiple times. Many thanks are also extended to my mother-in-law, Umm ʿAbd Allāh for initial proofing and editing, as well as her lovely daughter, Umm Ibrāhīm, for her unwavering support. I ask that Allāh reward those involved and overlook any faults and mistakes.
Introduction to the Second Edition After an unexpectedly positive reception of the first edition, I felt compelled to undertake a revision of the translation, which suffered from numerous typos, grammatical errors, and a handful of erroneous conclusions.
Besides merely correcting the above-mentioned flaws in the text, I decided to add further value to this edition by including numerous footnotes to define technical Islamic terms and clarify several extremely codified phrases. For the Arabic student, I have reviewed the original Arabic text

for accuracy, comparing it with several primary resources, and added 9095% of the diacritical marks.
For a more aesthetically pleasing presentation, I have reformatted the book so that the English translation is on the left side and the Arabic text is on the right.
I ask that Allāh accept and bless this effort and forgive me for any faults, as I do not expect that it is perfect.
I would like to thank everyone who sent constructive feedback on the first edition, especially Shaykh Majed Jarrar, whose suggestions were invaluable. May Allāh reward you immensely!
About the Author The shaykh, jurist, scholar, and skilled Imām ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. ʿAbd Allāh b. Aḥmad al-Ḥalabi al-Dimashqi al-Ḥanbali was born on 21, Jumādā al-Ūlā, 1110H in Baʿlabak. He was raised in a house filled with knowledge; his father, grandfather and great-grandfather were all revered scholars along with his older brothers Shaykh Muḥammad al-Ḥanbali and Shaykh Aḥmad the author of al-Rawḍ al-Nadā, the explanation of Kāfī alMubtadī.
After he reached the age of discernment, he began his study of the Qurʾān with his father, completing it by the age of 10. He then began seeking knowledge with his first teacher, Shaykh ʿAwwād al-Ḥanbali al-Nābulsi who taught him al-Ājrūmiyyah in Arabic grammar and Akhṣar alMukhtaṣarāt/The Supreme Synopsis in Fiqh. He studied with Shaykh ‘Awwād for many years, gradually developing and maturing in his knowledge.
After his father passed away, he remained under the tutelage of his brother and scholar, Shaykh Abu al-Muwāhib al-Ḥanbali, for five years, learning Fiqh and Ḥadīth. He also studied with the scholar Abd al-Qadir al-Taghlibi al-Ḥanbali, author of Nayl al-Maʾārib, for 15 years, learning Ḥadīth, Fiqh, Arabic grammar, Inheritance, and Usūl. Upon the completion of his studies , he was granted a general ijāzah. He also attended the lessons of the scholar Shaykh Ismāʿīl al-Ajlūni, author of Kashf al-Khafāʾa, on Saḥīḥ al-Bukhāri under the Nasr Dome in the Umayyad Masjid for approximately nine years and was granted a general ijāzah. Later, he

traveled to Aleppo and remained there studying Ḥadīth, Logic, Usūl, Grammar, and Rhetoric. He had numerous teachers and received many accolades from them, as well as ijāzahs. He also possessed the shortest chain of narration to Saḥīḥ al-Bukhāri, which was a mere 10 narrators. Imām al-Baʿli was praised by many scholars and was known for seeking knowledge his entire life from his numerous teachers.
Al-Murādi said, “the shaykh, the scholar, the virtuous, the righteous, was a Faqīh, proficient in the Islamic Sciences; in particular, the various recitations…”
Ibn Badrān said, “He was a Faqīh, an expert, eloquent, a poet…”. Shaykh ʿAbd al-Hayy al-Kettāni said, “The shaykh, the scholar, the reciter, and possessor of isnād…”.
He authored numerous books which are noted below. An abridgement of al-Jāmiʿ al-Ṣaghīr of al-Suyūti called Nūr al-Akhyār wa Rawḍ al-Abrār fi Ḥadīth al-Nabi al-Musṭafā al-Mukhtār which he confined to the ḥadīth transmitted by Imāms Aḥmad, al-Bukhāri, and Muslim.
An explanation of the previous book entitled, Fatḥ al-Sitār wa Kashf alMukhtār. A concise manual of worship entitled Bidāyat al-ʿĀbid wa Kifāyat alZāhid.
An explanation of the previous book entitled, Bulūgh al-Qāṣid Jull alMaqāṣid.
An explanation of Ibn Balbān’s Akhṣar al-Mukhtaṣarāt entitled, Kashf alMukhadarāt wa Riyāḍ al-Muzhirāt.
A scholarly poem abridging al-Raḥbiyyah entitled, al-Durrat al-Maḍiyah fi Ikhtisār al-Raḥbiyyah. An explanation of the previous poem entitled al-Fawaʾid al-Marḍiyyah.
A poem entitled Naẓm al-Ājrūmiyyah. ʿAbd al-Raḥmān al-Baʿli remained in Aleppo with support from numerous righteous people who supplied him with a livable wage and whatever he needed to live until his passing in 1192H. May Allāh shower him with mercy.

A uthor’s Introduction
In the name of Allāh the Most-Gracious, Most-Merciful. All praise belongs to Allāh who bestows understanding of the faith upon whom He wills from the servants and grants success in worship and veracity to those obedient to Him. We ask Allāh for eternal and continuous prayers and peace for our leader Muḥammad, the guide to the path of truth, for his family, his honorable leading and exemplary companions, and all who perfectly follow them until the Day of Return.
I have sought Allāh’s guidance in authoring a beneficial and concise manual restricted to the acts of worship based on the jurisprudence of the highly regarded Imām Abū ʿAbdullāh Aḥmad b. Ḥanbal to encourage the disciple and grant access to those seeking benefit. I have called it, ‘Bidāyat al-ʿĀbid wa Kifāyat al-Zāhid’. I request that Allāh accept it and to benefit everyone, both inquirer and inquired of, who busies themselves with it, for indeed He is the most generous in whom to place one’s hope.
‫ُﻣَﻘﱢﺪَﻣُﺔ اﻟُﻤ َﺆﻟﱢ ِﻒ‬ ‫ﺑِ ْﺴِﻢ ا ﱠﷲِ اﻟ ﱠﺮ ْﺣَﻤ ِﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺮ ِﺣﯿِﻢ، اﻟ َﺤ ْﻤُﺪ ِﱠﷲِ اﻟﱠِﺬي ﻓَﻘﱠَﻪ ﻓِﻲ ِدﯾﻨِِﻪ َﻣ ْﻦ َﺷﺎَء ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟِﻌﺒَﺎِد، َو َوﻓﱠ َﻖ أََﻫ َﻞ َﻃﺎ َﻋﺘِِﻪ ﻟِﻠِْﻌﺒَﺎَدِة‬ ‫َواﻟ ﱠﺴَﺪاِد، َواﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼُة َواﻟ ﱠﺴَﻼُم َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺳﯿﱢِﺪﻧَﺎ ُﻣ َﺤﱠﻤٍﺪ اﻟَﻬﺎِدي إِﻟَﻰ َﻃ ِﺮﯾ ِﻖ اﻟ ﱠﺮ َﺷﺎِد، َو َﻋﻠَﻰ آﻟِِﻪ َوأَ ْﺻ َﺤﺎﺑِِﻪ اﻟ ﱠﺴﺎَدِة‬
.ِ ‫اﻟﻘَﺎَدِة اﻷَ ْﻣ َﺠﺎِد، َو َﻋﻠَﻰ ﺗَﺎﺑِِﻌﯿِﻬْﻢ ﺑِﺈِ ْﺣ َﺴﺎ ٍن َﺻَﻼًة َداﺋَِﻤًﺔ ُﻣﺘﱠ ِﺼﻠًَﺔ إِﻟَﻰ ﯾَ ْﻮِم اﻟَﻤَﻌﺎد‬ ً‫أَﱠﻣﺎ ﺑَ ْﻌُﺪ ﻓَﻘَْﺪ ا ْﺳﺘَ َﺨ ْﺮ ُت ا ﱠﷲَ ﻓِﻲ َﺟ ْﻤ ِﻊ ُﻣ ْﺨﺘَ َﺼ ٍﺮ ُﻣﻔِﯿٍﺪ، ُﻣْﻘﺘَ ِﺼ ًﺮا ﻓِﯿِﻪ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟِﻌﺒَﺎَدا ِت ﺗَ ْﺮ ِﻏﯿﺒﺎً ﻟِﻠُﻤ ِﺮﯾِﺪ، َوﺗَْﻘ ِﺮﯾﺒﺎ‬ ‫ﻟِﻠُْﻤ ْﺴﺘَﻔِﯿِﺪ، ﻓِﻲ ﻓِْﻘِﻪ اِﻹَﻣﺎِم اﻟُﻤﺒَ ﱠﺠ ِﻞ، أَﺑِﻲ َﻋْﺒِﺪ ا ﱠﷲِ أَ ْﺣَﻤَﺪ ْﺑ ِﻦ ُﻣﺤﱠﻤٍﺪ ْﺑ ِﻦ َﺣْﻨﺒَ ٍﻞ، َو َﺳﱠﻤْﯿﺘُُﻪ " ﺑَِﺪاﯾََﺔ اﻟَﻌﺎﺑِِﺪ‬ ،‫َوِﻛﻔَﺎﯾََﺔ اﻟ ﱠﺰا ِﻫﺪ ِ" ، َوِﻣ َﻦ ا ﱠﷲِ ﺗََﻌﺎﻟَﻰ أَ ْرﺗَ ِﺠﻲ ﻟَُﻪ اﻟﻘَﺒُﻮ َل َواﻟﻨﱠْﻔ َﻊ ﻟُِﻜ ﱢﻞ َﻣ ْﻦ ا ْﺷﺘََﻐ َﻞ ﺑِِﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺳﺎﺋِ ٍﻞ َوَﻣ ُﺴ ُﺆو ٍل‬
.ٍ ‫إِﻧﱠُﻪ أ ْﻛ َﺮُم َﻣْﺄُﻣﻮل‬
Purification It is the removal of a ḥadath [1] and elimination of a khabath [2] . Water is of three types: ṭahūr; ṭāhir; and najis.
Ṭahūr is what remains in its natural state. It is intrinsically pure and an abluent. It is categorically permissible to use.
Ṭāhir is what has greatly changed in color, taste, or odor due to a ṭāhir object. It is intrinsically pure, but not an abluent. It is permissible to use,

except to remove a ḥadath or a khabath.
Najis [3] is what has changed due to najāsah [4] , except on the location being purified. It is categorically impermissible to use, unless in dire need [5] . An abundant amount is two qullahs or more and a meager amount is lesser than that. They are equivalent to 107.7 Damascus pounds or whatever is comparable [6] . Ṭāhir vessels are permissible to keep and use, as long as they are neither gold nor silver.
‫ِﻛﺘَﺎ ُب اﻟ ﱠﻄ َﻬﺎ َرِة‬ .ِ ‫َو ِﻫ َﻲ ا ْرﺗَﻔَﺎ ُع اﻟ َﺤَﺪ ِث َو َز َوا ُل اﻟ َﺨﺒَﺚ‬ .ٌ ‫َواﻟِﻤﯿَﺎُه ﺛَ َﻼﺛَﺔ ٌ: َﻃُﻬﻮ ٌر، َو َﻃﺎ ِﻫ ٌﺮ، َوﻧَ ِﺠﺲ‬ .ً ‫ﻓَﺎﻟ ﱠﻄُﻬﻮر ُ: ُﻫ َﻮ اﻟﺒَﺎﻗِﻲ َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﺧﻠْﻘَﺘِِﻪ َﻃُﻬﻮ ٌر ﻓِﻲ ﻧَْﻔ ِﺴِﻪ ُﻣ َﻄﱢﻬ ٌﺮ ﻟَِﻐﯿ ِﺮِه، ﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز ا ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﻤﺎﻟُُﻪ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎ‬ ‫َواﻟ ﱠﻄﺎ ِﻫﺮ ُ : َﻣﺎ ﺗََﻐﯿﱠ َﺮ َﻛﺜِﯿ ٌﺮ ِﻣﻦ ﻟَْﻮﻧِِﻪ أَْو َﻃ ْﻌِﻤِﻪ أَْو ِرﯾ ِﺤِﻪ ﺑِ َﻄﺎ ِﻫ ٍﺮ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻃﺎ ِﻫ ٌﺮ ﻓِﻲ ﻧَْﻔ ِﺴِﻪ َﻏْﯿ ُﺮ ُﻣ َﻄﱢﻬ ٍﺮ‬ .ٍ ‫ﻟَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮِه، ﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز ا ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﻤﺎﻟُُﻪ ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َرْﻓ ِﻊ َﺣَﺪ ٍث و َز َوا ِل َﺧﺒَﺚ‬ .ٍ ‫َواﻟﻨﱠ ِﺠﺲ ُ: َﻣﺎ ﺗََﻐﯿﱠ َﺮ ﺑِﻨَ َﺠﺎ َﺳٍﺔ ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﻣ َﺤ ﱢﻞ ﺗَ ْﻄِﻬﯿ ٍﺮ، َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم ا ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﻤﺎﻟُُﻪ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎً إِﱠﻻ ﻟِ َﻀ ُﺮو َرة‬ ‫َواﻟَﻜﺜِﯿ ُﺮ ﻗُﻠﱠﺘَﺎ ِن ﻓَﺄَ ْﻛﺜَ ُﺮ، َواﻟﯿَ ِﺴﯿ ُﺮ َﻣﺎ ُدوﻧَُﻬَﻤﺎ، َو ُﻫَﻢ ا : ِﻣﺎﺋَُﺔ ِر ْﻃ ٍﻞ َو َﺳْﺒَﻌُﺔ أَ ْر َﻃﺎ ٍل و ُﺳﺒُ ُﻊ ِر ْﻃ ٍﻞ ﺑِﺎﻟﱢﺪَﻣ ْﺸﻘِ ﱢﻲ‬
.ُ ‫َوَﻣﺎ َواﻓَﻘَﻪ‬ .ٍ ‫َوُﻛ ﱡﻞ إِﻧَﺎٍء َﻃﺎ ِﻫ ٍﺮ ﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح اﺗﱢ َﺨﺎُذُه َوا ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﻤﺎﻟُُﻪ َﻏْﯿ َﺮ َذ َﻫ ٍﺐ وﻓِ ﱠﻀﺔ‬
Istinjāʾ, Istijmār, Manners of the Restroom Istinjāʾ is the act of removing whatever comes out of a tract with water or stone, etc. It is obligated due to everything that comes out except flatulence, anything ṭāhir, or something unsoiled. Istijmār is not valid unless performed with something ṭāhir, permissible, dry, and cleansing. Cleaning with a stone, etc. is concluded when nothing remains except for traces only removable by water. The following are prerequisites: that it be made with three wipes or more which cleanse; the excrement must not surpass its normal location; and if water is used, it must completely clean the area, the assumption of which is sufficient.

It is impermissible to use manure, bone, or food, including animal feed. Neither wuḍūʾ nor tayammum are valid when made before it. It is impermissible to: linger longer than one’s pressing need; defecate in water; defecate or urinate in a watering place, on a traversed path, in used shade, or under a fruit bearing tree of harvest; or to face or turn one’s back to the qiblah [7] in open space.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َواﻻ ْﺳﺘِْﻨ َﺠﺎُء إَِزاﻟَُﺔ َﻣﺎ َﺧ َﺮ َج ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺳﺒِﯿ ٍﻞ ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء أَْو َﺣ َﺠ ٍﺮ َوﻧﺤ ِﻮِه، َو ُﻫ َﻮ َوا ِﺟ ٌﺐ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َﺧﺎ ِر ٍج إِﱠﻻ اﻟ ﱢﺮﯾـ َﺢ‬
.ِ ‫َواﻟ ﱠﻄﺎ ِﻫ َﺮ َو َﻏْﯿ َﺮ اﻟُﻤﻠَﱠﻮث‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ اﻻ ْﺳﺘِ ْﺠَﻤﺎ ُر إﱠﻻ ﺑِ َﻄﺎ ِﻫ ٍﺮ ُﻣﺒَﺎ ٍح ﯾَﺎﺑِ ٍﺲ ُﻣﻨَ ﱟﻖ، ﻓَﺎﻹِْﻧﻘَﺎُء ﺑِ َﺤ َﺠ ٍﺮ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه أَ ْن ﯾَْﺒﻘَﻰ أَﺛَ ٌﺮ َﻻ ﯾُ ِﺰﯾﻠُُﻪ إِﱠﻻ‬
.ُ ‫اﻟَﻤﺎء‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ﻟَﻪ ُ: ﺛََﻼ ُث َﻣ ْﺴ َﺤﺎ ٍت ﻓَﺄ ْﻛﺜَ ُﺮ ُﻣﻨَﻘﱢﯿٍَﺔ، َو َﻋَﺪُم ﺗََﻌﱢﺪي َﺧﺎ ِر ٍج َﻣ ْﻮ ِﺿ َﻊ اﻟَﻌﺎَدِة، وَﺑَِﻤﺎٍء َﻋ ْﻮُد اﻟَﻤ َﺤ ﱢﻞ َﻛَﻤﺎ‬
.ُ ‫َﻛﺎ َن، َو َﻇﻨﱡُﻪ َﻛﺎف ٍ. َو َﺣ ُﺮَم ﺑِ َﺮ ْو ٍث وَ َﻋ ْﻈٍﻢ َو َﻃَﻌﺎٍم َوﻟَْﻮ ﻟِﺒَِﻬﯿَﻤٍﺔ، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ ُو ُﺿﻮٌء َوَﻻ ﺗَﯿَـﱠﻤٌﻢ ﻗَْﺒﻠَﻪ‬ ،‫َو َﺣ ُﺮَم ﻟُْﺒ ٌﺚ ﻓَ ْﻮ َق ﻗَْﺪ ِر َﺣﺎ َﺟﺘِِﻪ، وﺗََﻐ ﱡﻮ ُﻃُﻪ ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء، َوﺑَ ْﻮﻟُُﻪ َوﺗََﻐ ﱡﻮ ُﻃُﻪ ﺑَِﻤ ْﺮ َوٍة َوﺑِ َﻄ ِﺮﯾ ٍﻖ َﻣ ْﺴﻠُﻮ ٍك، َ َو ِﻇ ﱟﻞ ﻧَﺎﻓِ ٍﻊ‬
.ٍ ‫َوﺗَ ْﺤ َﺖ َﺷ َﺠ َﺮٍة َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ ﺛََﻤ ٌﺮ ﯾُْﻘ َﺼُﺪ، َوا ْﺳﺘِْﻘﺒَﺎ ُل ﻗِْﺒﻠٍَﺔ َوا ْﺳﺘِْﺪﺑﺎ ُر َﻫﺎ ﺑِﻔَ َﻀﺎء‬
Personal Hygiene The siwāk [8] is categorically recommended, except after the zawāl [9] , w hich is disliked for someone fasting. Before the zawāl, it is permissible with a moist stick, though preferred with a dry one. Whoever uses something besides a stick has not conformed to the sunnah. It is emphasized before: prayer; recitation; when making wuḍūʾ; waking from sleep; entering the masjid; due to a change of breath; etc. It is recommended to do the following: begin with the right side for siwāk, purification, and all affairs; use oil and kuḥl [10] ; look in the mirror; apply perfume; shave the pubic region; trim the mustache [11] ; cut the nails; and pluck the armpits. Though early childhood is best, it is obligatory to circumcise [12] both male and female at the age of puberty.
ٌَ

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َواﻟ ﱢﺴ َﻮا ُك َﻣ ْﺴﻨُﻮ ٌن ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎً، إﱠﻻ ﻟِ َﺼﺎﺋِـٍﻢ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟ ﱠﺰ َوا ِل ﻓَﯿُ ْﻜ َﺮُه، وﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ﻗَْﺒﻠَُﻪ ﺑُِﻌﻮٍد َر ْﻃ ٍﺐ، َوﯾُ ْﺴﺘَ َﺤ ﱡﺐ ﺑِﯿَﺎﺑِ ٍﺲ، َوﻟَﻢ‬
.ٍ ‫ﯾُ ِﺼ ِﺐ اﻟ ﱡﺴﻨﱠَﺔ َﻣ ْﻦ ا ْﺳﺘَﺎ َك ﺑَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮ ُﻋﻮد‬ .ِ ‫َوﯾُﺘَﺄَﱠﻛُﺪ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ َﺻَﻼٍة َوﻗِ َﺮاَءٍة َو ُو ُﺿﻮٍء، َواْﻧﺘِﺒَﺎٍه ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻧَ ْﻮٍم، َوُد ُﺧﻮ ِل َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ َوﺗََﻐﯿﱡ ِﺮ َراﺋِ َﺤِﺔ ﻓٍَﻢ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮه‬ ،‫َو ُﺳ ّﻦ َ : ﺑَُﺪاَءٌة ﺑِﺎﻷَْﯾَﻤ ِﻦ ﻓِﻲ ِﺳ َﻮا ٍك َو َﻃُﻬﻮ ٍر َو َﺷﺄﻧِِﻪ ُﻛﻠﱢِﻪ، َواﱢد َﻫﺎ ٌن، َوا ْﻛﺘِ َﺤﺎ ٌل، َوﻧَ َﻈ ٌﺮ ﻓِﻲ ِﻣ ْﺮآٍة، َوﺗَ َﻄﯿﱡ ٌﺐ‬
.ٍ ‫َوا ْﺳﺘِ ْﺤَﺪاٌد، َو َﺣ ﱡﻒ َﺷﺎ ِر ٍب، َو ﺗَْﻘﻠِﯿُﻢ ُﻇْﻔ ٍﺮ، َوﻧَْﺘ ُﻒ إِْﺑﻂ‬ .ُ ‫َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ِﺧﺘَﺎ ُن َذَﻛ ٍﺮ َوأُْﻧﺜَﻰ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ﺑُﻠُﻮ ٍغ، َو َزَﻣ َﻦ ِﺻَﻐ ٍﺮ أَﻓ َﻀﻞ‬
Wuḍūʾ Wuḍūʾ is the application of ṭahūr water on four designated body parts in a specific manner. Mentioning Allāh’s name for it, ghusl, tayammum, washing the hands after waking from a night’s sleep that has invalidated wuḍūʾ, and washing the deceased is obligatory . It is obligatory to wash both hands three times when waking from a night’s sleep, after making an intention and mentioning Allāh’s name. Wuḍūʾ has eight prerequisites, they are: cessation of what obligates it; intention, a prerequisite for every form of purification except eliminating khabath, etc.; Islām; sanity; discernment; permissible ṭahūr water; removal of what prohibits it; and istinjāʾ. It has six obligations, they are: washing the face (which includes the mouth and nose); washing the hands, including the elbows; wiping the entire head, including the ears; washing both feet, including the ankles; sequence; and continuity (both of which are not required for ghusl).
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،‫َواﻟ ُﻮ ُﺿﻮُء ا ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﻤﺎ ُل َﻣﺎٍء َﻃُﻬﻮ ٍر ﻓِﻲ اﻷَ ْﻋ َﻀﺎِء اﻷَ ْرﺑََﻌِﺔ َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﺻﻔٍَﺔ َﻣ ْﺨ ُﺼﻮ َﺻٍﺔ، َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﺴِﻤﯿَُﺔ َوا ِﺟﺒٌَﺔ ﻓِﯿِﻪ‬ ‫َوﻓِﻲ ُﻏ ْﺴ ٍﻞ، َوﺗَﯿَـﱡﻤٍﻢ، َو َﻏ ْﺴ ِﻞ ﯾََﺪ ْي ﻗَﺎﺋِـٍﻢ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻧَ ْﻮِم ﻟَْﯿ ٍﻞ ﻧَﺎﻗِ ٍﺾ ﻟُِﻮ ُﺿﻮٍء، َو َﻏ ْﺴ ِﻞ َﻣْﯿ ٍﺖ، َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ َﻏ ْﺴ ُﻞ ﯾََﺪ ْي‬
.ٍ ‫اﻟﻘَﺎﺋِـِﻢ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻧَ ْﻮِم اﻟﻠﱠْﯿ ِﻞ ﺛََﻼﺛﺎً ﺑِﻨِﯿﱠٍﺔ َوﺗَ ْﺴِﻤﯿَﺔ‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ُﺮو ُط اﻟ ُﻮ ُﺿﻮِء ﺛََﻤﺎﻧِﯿَﺔ ٌ: انْﻗِ َﻄﺎ ُع َﻣﺎ ﯾُﻮ ِﺟﺒُُﻪ، َواﻟﻨﱢﯿﱠُﺔ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ َﺷ ْﺮ ٌط ﻟُِﻜ ﱢﻞ َﻃَﻬﺎ َرٍة َﺷ ْﺮ ِﻋﯿﱠٍﺔ َﻏْﯿ َﺮ إَِزاﻟَِﺔ‬ ،‫َﺧﺒَ ٍﺚ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮ َﻫﺎ، َواﻹِ ْﺳَﻼُم، َواﻟَﻌْﻘ ُﻞ، َواﻟﺘَ ْﻤﯿِﯿ ُﺰ، َواﻟَﻤﺎُء اﻟ ﱠﻄُﻬﻮ ُر اﻟُﻤﺒَﺎ ُح، َوإَِزاﻟَُﺔ َﻣﺎ ﯾَ ْﻤﻨَ ُﻊ ُو ُﺻﻮﻟُُﻪ‬
.ُ ‫َواﻻِ ْﺳﺘِْﻨ َﺠﺎء‬ ‫َوﻓُ ُﺮو ُﺿُﻪ ِﺳﺘﱠﺔ ٌ : َﻏ ْﺴ ُﻞ اﻟﻮ َ ْﺟِﻪ، َوِﻣْﻨُﻪ ﻓٌَﻢ َوأَْﻧ ٌﻒ، َو َﻏ ْﺴ ُﻞ اﻟﯿََﺪْﯾ ِﻦ َﻣ َﻊ اﻟِﻤ ْﺮﻓَﻘَْﯿ ِﻦ، َوَﻣ ْﺴ ُﺢ اﻟ ﱠﺮأْ ِس ُﻛﻠﱢِﻪ‬
.ٍ ‫َوِﻣْﻨُﻪ اﻷُُذﻧَﺎ ِن، َو َﻏ ْﺴ ُﻞ اﻟ ﱢﺮ ْﺟﻠَْﯿ ِﻦ َﻣ َﻊ اﻟَﻜ ْﻌﺒَْﯿ ِﻦ، َوﺗَ ْﺮﺗِﯿ ٌﺐ، َوُﻣ َﻮاَﻻٌة، َوﯾَ ْﺴﻘُ َﻄﺎ ِن َﻣ َﻊ ُﻏ ْﺴﻞ‬

Wiping the Khuff It is permitted to wipe over the khuffs, etc., if the following seven prerequisites are met: wearing them after a complete purification with water; concealing the obligatory area; having the ability to walk (as per custom) in them; that they be independently fixed; permissible; ṭāhir; and that they not reveal the skin. After wearing them, both the resident and the traveler on a sinful journey are to wipe after a ḥadath for a day and a night. The traveler on a journey, which is not sinful in nature, of sufficient distance to shorten prayer is to wipe for three days and their nights. If someone were to wipe during travel and then settle, as a resident and then travel, or doubted when the wiping period began, they are not to exceed the wiping period of a resident.
It is permitted to wipe over a cast, which does not exceed the required size, if worn after purification. If it does exceed that, or was put on while impure, it must be removed. Due to formidable harm, tayammum is to be made along with wiping that which exceeds the required size and was worn in a state of purity.
If a portion of an obligatory part is revealed, something which necessitates ghusl occurs, or the time period expires, wuḍūʾ is invalidated.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ُﺢ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ ُﺨـﻔﱠْﯿ ِﻦ َوﻧَﺤ ِﻮ ِﻫَﻤﺎ ﺑِ َﺴْﺒَﻌِﺔ ُﺷ ُﺮوط ٍ : ﻟُْﺒ ُﺴُﻬَﻤﺎ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َﻛَﻤﺎ ِل َﻃَﻬﺎرٍَة ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء، و َﺳْﺘ ُﺮ ُﻫَﻤﺎ‬ ‫ﻟَِﻤ َﺤ ﱢﻞ ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍض، وإ ْﻣَﻜﺎ ُن َﻣ ْﺸ ٍﻲ ﺑِِﻬَﻤﺎ ُﻋ ْﺮﻓﺎً، وﺛُﺒُﻮﺗُُﻬَﻤﺎ ﺑِﻨَْﻔ ِﺴِﻬَﻤﺎ، َوإﺑَﺎ َﺣﺘُُﻬَﻤﺎ، َو َﻃَﻬﺎ َرُة َﻋْﯿﻨِِﻬَﻤﺎ، َو َﻋَﺪُم‬ ‫َو ْﺻﻔِِﻬَﻤﺎ اﻟﺒَ َﺸ َﺮة َ. ﻓَﯿَ ْﻤ َﺴ ُﺢ ُﻣﻘِﯿٌﻢ َو َﻋﺎ ٍص ﺑِ َﺴﻔَ ِﺮِه ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺣَﺪ ٍث ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﻟُْﺒ ٍﺲ ﯾﻮﻣﺎً وﻟَﯿﻠًَﺔ، َوُﻣ َﺴﺎﻓِ ٌﺮ َﺳﻔَ َﺮ ﻗَ ْﺼ ٍﺮ‬ ‫ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﻌ ِﺺ ﺑِِﻪ ﺛَﻼﺛًَﺔ ﺑِﻠَﯿَﺎﻟِﯿِﻬ ﱠﻦ، ﻓَﻠَْﻮ َﻣ َﺴ َﺢ ﻓِﻲ َﺳﻔَ ٍﺮ ﺛُﱠﻢ أَﻗَﺎَم، أَْو ﻓِﻲ َﺣ َﻀ ٍﺮ ﺛُﱠﻢ َﺳﺎﻓَ َﺮ، أَْو َﺷ ﱠﻚ ﻓِﻲ اْﺑﺘَِﺪاِء‬
.ٍ ‫اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺢ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺰْد َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺢ ُﻣﻘِﯿﻢ‬ ‫َوﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ُﺢ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺟﺒِﯿ َﺮٍة إِ ْن َﻛﺎ َن َو َﺿَﻌَﻬﺎ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻃَﻬﺎ َرٍة َوﻟَْﻢ ﺗُ َﺠﺎ ِو ْز ﻗَْﺪ َر اﻟ َﺤﺎ َﺟِﺔ، َوإِ ْن َﺟﺎ َو َزْﺗُﻪ أَْو‬ ‫َﻛﺎ َن َو َﺿَﻌَﻬﺎ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﻃَﻬﺎ َرٍة َو َﺟ َﺐ ﻧَ ْﺰ ُﻋَﻬﺎ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن َﺧﺎ َف َﺿ َﺮراً ﺗَﯿَـﱠﻤَﻢ َﻣ َﻊ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺢ َﻣ ْﻮ ُﺿﻮ َﻋٍﺔ َﻋﻠَﻰ‬
.ِ ‫َﻃَﻬﺎ َرٍة ُﻣ َﺠﺎ َو َزٍة َﻣ َﺤ ﱢﻞ اﻟ َﺤﺎ َﺟﺔ‬ .ُ ‫َوإِ ْن َﻇَﻬ َﺮ ﺑَ ْﻌ ُﺾ َﻣ َﺤ ﱢﻞ ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍض أَْو َﺣ َﺼ َﻞ َﻣﺎ ﯾُﻮ ِﺟ ُﺐ اﻟُﻐ ْﺴ ُﻞ أَْو اْﻧﻘَ َﻀ ْﺖ اﻟُﻤﱠﺪُة ﺑَ َﻄ َﻞ اﻟ ُﻮ ُﺿﻮء‬

Invalidators of Wuḍūʾ There are eight invalidators of wuḍūʾ which are: excretion of anything from a tract, of urine or feces from the rest of the body (be it a lot or a little); or excretion of other things such as vomit or blood if considered abundant (relative to each person’s own view); loss of consciousness (except the dozing of someone standing or sitting); washing the deceased or a portion thereof; eating camel meat, even if raw, (a cause which is purely devotional, as its other parts do not invalidate it e.g. drinking its milk or meat stock); touching an attached human sex organ [13] or anus, even if deceased, with the hand (excluding the testicles and the location of a severed sex organ); the desirous touch of the opposite gender without a barrier (even via extra appendage to another); and apostasy. Everything which requires ghusl requires wuḍūʾ, except death, which only requires ghusl; wuḍūʾ is recommended. It is not invalidated due to impermissible speech, or the removal of hair, nails, etc. Whoever doubts the performance of purification or the occurrence of a ḥadath, even while not in prayer, is to act upon what they are certain of.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﻧَ َﻮاﻗِ ُﺾ اﻟ ُﻮ ُﺿﻮِء ﺛََﻤﺎﻧِﯿَﺔ ٌ: َﺧﺎ ِر ٌج ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺳﺒِﯿ ٍﻞ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎً، َو ُﺧ ُﺮو ُج ﺑَ ْﻮ ٍل أَْو َﻏﺎﺋِ ٍﻂ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﺑَﺎﻗِﻲ اﻟﺒََﺪ ِن ﻗَ ﱠﻞ أَو َﻛﺜُ َﺮ‬ ‫أَْو َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ِﻫَﻤﺎ َﻛﻘَ ْﻲٍء أَْو َدٍم إِ ْن ﻓَ ُﺤ َﺶ ﻓِﻲ ﻧَْﻔ ِﺲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ أَ َﺣٍﺪ ﺑِ َﺤ َﺴﺒِِﻪ، َو َز َوا ُل َﻋْﻘ ٍﻞ إِﱠﻻ ﯾَ ِﺴﯿ َﺮ ﻧَ ْﻮٍم ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻗَﺎﺋِـٍﻢ أَْو‬ ‫َﺟﺎﻟِ ٍﺲ، َو ُﻏ ْﺴ ُﻞ َﻣﯿﱢ ٍﺖ أَْو ﺑَ ْﻌ ِﻀِﻪ، َوأَْﻛ ُﻞ ﻟَ ْﺤِﻢ إِﺑِ ٍﻞ، َوﻟَﻮ ﻧَـْﯿﺌﺎً ﺗََﻌﺒﱡﺪاً، ﻓَََﻼ ﻧَْﻘ َﺾ ﺑِﺒَﻘِﯿَِﺔ أَ ْﺟ َﺰاﺋَِﻬﺎ، َو ُﺷ ْﺮ ِب ﻟَﺒَﻨَِﻬﺎ‬ ‫َوَﻣ َﺮ ِق ﻟَ ْﺤِﻤَﻬﺎ، َوَﻣ ﱡﺲ ﻓَ ْﺮ ِج آَدِﻣ ﱟﻲ ُﻣﺘﱠ ِﺼ ٍﻞ أَْو َﺣﻠْﻘَِﺔ ُدﺑُ ِﺮِه َوﻟَْﻮ َﻣﯿﱢﺘﺎً ﺑِﯿَِﺪِه َﻻ َﻣ ﱡﺲ اﻟ ِﺨ ْﺼﯿَﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ، َوَﻻ َﻣ َﺤ ﱡﻞ‬
.ُ ‫اﻟﻔَ ْﺮ ِج اﻟﺒَﺎﺋِ ِﻦ، َوﻟَْﻤ ُﺲ َذَﻛ ٍﺮ أَْو أُْﻧﺜَﻰ اﻵ َﺧ َﺮ ﻟِ َﺸ ْﻬ َﻮٍة ﺑَِﻼ َﺣﺎﺋِ ٍﻞ، َوﻟَْﻮ ﺑِ َﺰاﺋٍِﺪ ﻟَِﺰاﺋٍِﺪ، َواﻟ ﱢﺮﱠدة‬ ‫َوُﻛ ﱡﻞ َﻣﺎ أَْو َﺟ َﺐ ُﻏ ْﺴ ًﻼ أَْو َﺟ َﺐ ُو ُﺿﻮًءا َﻏْﯿ َﺮ َﻣ ْﻮ ٍت؛ ﻓَﺈِﻧَﻪ ﯾُﻮ ِﺟ ُﺐ اﻟُﻐ ْﺴ َﻞ َﻻ اﻟ ُﻮ ُﺿﻮَء، ﺑَ ْﻞ ﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ، َوَﻻ ﻧَْﻘ َﺾ‬ ‫ﺑَِﻜَﻼٍم ُﻣ َﺤ ﱠﺮٍم، َوَﻻ ﺑِﺈِ َزاﻟَِﺔ َﺷ ْﻌ ٍﺮ َو ُﻇْﻔ ٍﺮ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮ ِﻫَﻤﺎ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ﱠﻚ ﻓِﻲ َﻃَﻬﺎ َرٍة أَْو َﺣَﺪ ٍث َوﻟ ْﻮ ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﺻَﻼٍة‬
.ِ ‫ﺑَﻨَﻰ َﻋﻠَﻰ ﯾَﻘِﯿﻨِﻪ‬
Ghusl There are seven mandatory causes for ghusl [14] , which include the following: secretion of orgasmic fluid (Ghusl is obligatory even if its mere secretion is sensed and ejaculation is prevented [15] . If ghusl is thus performed and then it apathetically discharges, it is not repeated); its

ejaculation—even if bloody [16] —from its location (with consideration given to an orgasm of someone not sleeping, etc.); the insertion of a primary male glans, or its equivalent, into a primary sexual opening including an anus (even that of an animal or corpse) and of someone with whom intercourse is performed, even while asleep; acceptance of Islām by a disbeliever (even if they were an apostate and/or have done nothing which requires ghusl while in the state of disbelief); the excretion of menstrual or postpartum blood (it is not required for a delivery absent of bleeding); and death (a cause for which ghusl is purely devotional) of other than the martyred in battle or the wrongly killed. The prayer place for ‘Eid (not for funeral prayers) is considered a masjid in which seeking commercial profit is prohibited.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ُﻣﻮ ِﺟﺒَﺎ ُت اﻟُﻐ ْﺴ ِﻞ َﺳْﺒَﻌﺔ ٌ: اْﻧﺘِﻘَﺎ ُل َﻣﻨِ ﱟﻲ، ﻓَﻠَْﻮ أَ َﺣ ﱠﺲ ﺑِﺎْﻧﺘِﻘَﺎﻟِِﻪ ﻓَ َﺤﺒَ َﺴُﻪ ﻓَﻠَﻢ ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﺮ ْج َو َﺟ َﺐ اﻟُﻐ ْﺴ ُﻞ، ﻓَﻠَْﻮ ا ْﻏﺘَ َﺴ َﻞ‬ .ِ ‫ﻟَُﻪ ﺛُﱠﻢ َﺧ َﺮ َج ﺑَِﻼ ﻟَﱠﺬٍة ﻟَْﻢ ﯾُِﻌْﺪُه، َو ُﺧ ُﺮو ُﺟُﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣ ْﺨ َﺮ ِﺟِﻪ َوﻟَْﻮ َدﻣﺎً، َوﺗُ ْﻌﺘَﺒَ ُﺮ ﻟَﱠﺬٌة ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ﻧَﺎﺋِـٍﻢ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮه‬ ،ً‫َوﺗَ ْﻐﯿِﯿ ُﺐ َﺣ َﺸﻔٍَﺔ أَ ْﺻﻠِﯿﱠٍﺔ أَْو ﻗَْﺪ ِر َﻫﺎ ﻓِﻲ ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍج أَ ْﺻﻠِ ﱟﻲ َوﻟَْﻮ ُدﺑُﺮاً ﻟِﺒَِﻬﯿَﻤٍﺔ أَْو َﻣﯿﱢ ٍﺖ ِﻣﱠﻤ ْﻦ ﯾُ َﺠﺎَﻣ ُﻊ ﻣْﺜﻠُُﻪ َوﻟَْﻮ ﻧَﺎﺋِﻤﺎ‬ ‫ﺪا أَْو ﻟَْﻢ ﯾُﻮ َﺟْﺪ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ ﻓِﻲ ُﻛْﻔ ِﺮِه َﻣﺎ ﯾُﻮ ِﺟﺒُُﻪ، َو ُﺧ ُﺮو ُج َﺣْﯿ ٍﺾ، و ُﺧ ُﺮو ُج َدِم ﻧِﻔَﺎ ٍس، ﻓََﻼ‬َ‫َوإِ ْﺳَﻼُم َﻛﺎﻓِ ٍﺮ، َوﻟَْﻮ ُﻣ ْﺮﺗ‬
.ً ‫ﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﺑِ ِﻮَﻻَدٍة َﻋ َﺮ ْت َﻋْﻨُﻪ، َوَﻣﻮ ٌت ﺗََﻌﺒﱡﺪاً َﻏْﯿ َﺮ َﺷِﻬﯿِﺪ َﻣ ْﻌ َﺮَﻛٍﺔ وَﻣْﻘﺘُﻮ ٍل ُﻇﻠْﻤﺎ‬ .ِ ‫َوُﻣ َﺼﻠﱠﻰ اﻟِﻌﯿِﺪ َﻻ اﻟ َﺠﻨَﺎﺋِـ ِﺰ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠٌﺪ، َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم ﺗََﻜ ﱡﺴ ٌﺐ ﺑِ ُﺼْﻨَﻌٍﺔ ﻓِﯿﻪ‬
Prerequisites of Ghusl The seven prerequisites of ghusl are: cessation of what requires it; intention; Islām; sanity; discernment; purifying permissible water; and removal of whatever prevents its contact. It is obligatory that water wet the entire body, along with the inside of the mouth and nose, as well as what appears of a woman's vulva when she sits to relieve herself. Assumption is sufficient for completeness. Whoever intends either a recommended or an obligatory ghusl will be sufficed for the other. Sleeping while sexually impure is disliked without wuḍūʾ. Constructing bath-houses, selling and renting them, reciting in them, and giving greetings of peace in them is also disliked; but not dhikr. It is permissible to enter them while clothed and secure from the occurrence of something

impermissible, disliked if otherwise feared, and impermissible if known or if a woman were to enter without justification.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ُﺮو ُط اﻟُﻐ ْﺴ ِﻞ َﺳْﺒَﻌﺔ ٌ : اْﻧﻘِ َﻄﺎ ُع َﻣﺎ ﯾُﻮ ِﺟﺒُُﻪ، َواﻟﻨﱢﯿﱠُﺔ، َواِﻹ ْﺳَﻼُم، َواﻟَﻌْﻘ ُﻞ، َواﻟﺘَ ْﻤﯿِﯿ ُﺰ، َواﻟَﻤﺎُء اﻟ ﱠﻄُﻬﻮ ُر‬ ‫اﻟُﻤﺒَﺎ ُح، َوإَِزاﻟَُﺔ َﻣﺎ ﯾَ ْﻤﻨَ ُﻊ ُو ُﺻﻮﻟَﻪ ُ . َوﻓَ ْﺮ ُﺿُﻪ أَ ْن ﯾَُﻌﱠﻢ ﺑِﺎﻟَﻤﺎِء َﺟِﻤﯿ َﻊ ﺑََﺪﻧِِﻪ َوَدا ِﺧ َﻞ ﻓَِﻤِﻪ َوأَْﻧﻔِِﻪ َﺣﺘﱠﻰ َﻣﺎ‬ ‫ﯾَ ْﻈَﻬ ُﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻓَ ْﺮ ِج ا ْﻣ َﺮأٍَة ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ﻗُُﻌﻮِد َﻫﺎ ﻟِ َﺤﺎ َﺟﺘَِﻬﺎ، َوﯾَ ْﻜﻔِﻲ اﻟ ﱠﻈ ﱡﻦ ﻓِﻲ اِﻹ ْﺳﺒَﺎ ِغ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﻧَ َﻮى ُﻏ ْﺴ ًﻼ َﻣ ْﺴﻨُﻮﻧﺎً أَْو‬
.ِ ‫َوا ِﺟﺒﺎً أَ ْﺟ َﺰأَ َﻋ ْﻦ اﻵ َﺧﺮ‬ ،‫َوُﻛ ِﺮَه ﻧَ ْﻮُم ُﺟﻨُ ٍﺐ ﺑَِﻼ ُو ُﺿﻮٍء، َوﯾُ ْﻜ َﺮُه ﺑِﻨَﺎُء اﻟ َﺤﱠﻤﺎِم َوﺑَْﯿُﻌُﻪ َوإِ َﺟﺎ َرﺗُُﻪ َواﻟﻘِﺮاَءُة ﻓِﯿِﻪ، َواﻟ ﱠﺴَﻼُم َﻻ اﻟﱢﺬ ْﻛ ُﺮ‬ ‫َوُد ُﺧﻮﻟُُﻪ ﺑِ ُﺴْﺘ َﺮٍة َﻣ َﻊ أَْﻣ ِﻦ اﻟ ُﻮﻗُﻮ ِع ﻓِﻲ ُﻣ َﺤ ﱠﺮٍم ُﻣﺒَﺎ ٌح، َوإِ ْن ِﺧﯿ َﻒ ُﻛ ِﺮَه، َوإِ ْن َﻋﻠَِﻢ أَْو َد َﺧﻠَْﺘُﻪ أُْﻧﺜَﻰ ﺑَِﻼ ُﻋْﺬ ٍر‬
.َ ‫َﺣ ُﺮم‬
Tayammum Tayammum is a specific application of earth on the face and hands as a replacement for water-based purification due to a legal inability, except for filth not found on the body or remaining in the masjid due to a need. Its three prerequisites are: entrance of the prayer time; absence of water due to it being withheld, etc.; or due to fear of either physical or financial harm resulting from its usage, etc. Whoever finds water which is not sufficient for purification is obliged to use it and then perform tayammum [17] . It is made with ṭahūr permissible unfired earth that has dust which sticks to the hand. In its absence, one is to pray what is required, as they are, not adding more than what is sufficient and is not obliged to repeat it. Its obligations include: wiping the face and the hands to the wrists; both sequence and continuity for a minor ḥadath, i.e. equivalent to wuḍūʾ; and specifying an intention legalizing what tayammum is being performed for of either ḥadath or najāsah. An intent for one is not sufficient for the other, however an intention for both is sufficient. It is invalidated by the following: whatever invalidates wuḍūʾ; the time expiring; the presence of water (if tayammum was performed due to its absence); the termination of what permitted it; or the removal of what was wiped over.
ٌَ

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ً‫اﻟﺘَﯿَﱡﻤُﻢ ا ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﻤﺎ ُل ﺗُ َﺮا ٍب َﻣ ْﺨ ُﺼﻮ ٍص ﻟَِﻮ ْﺟٍﻪ َوﯾََﺪْﯾ ِﻦ ﺑََﺪ ُل َﻃَﻬﺎ َرِة ﻣﺎٍء ﻟُِﻜ ﱢﻞ َﻣﺎ ﯾُْﻔَﻌ ُﻞ ﺑِِﻪ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ َﻋ ْﺠ ٍﺰ َﻋْﻨُﻪ َﺷ ْﺮﻋﺎ‬
.ٍ ‫ِﺳ َﻮى ﻧَ َﺠﺎ َﺳٍﺔ َﻋﻠَﻰ ﻏﯿ ِﺮ ﺑََﺪ ٍن، َوﻟُْﺒ ٍﺚ ﺑَِﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ ﻟِﺤﺎ َﺟﺔ‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ُﺮو ُﻃُﻪ ﺛََﻼﺛَﺔ ٌ : ُد ُﺧﻮ ُل َوْﻗ ِﺖ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼِة، َوﺗََﻌﱡﺬ ُر اﻟَﻤﺎِء ﻟِ َﺤـْﺒ ِﺴِﻪ َﻋْﻨُﻪ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه أَْو ﻟِ َﺨـ ْﻮﻓِِﻪ ﺑِ َﻄﻠَﺒِِﻪ أَْو‬ ،‫ا ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﻤﺎﻟِِﻪ َﺿ َﺮراً ﺑِﺒََﺪﻧِِﻪ أ ْو َﻣﺎﻟِِﻪ أَْو َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ِﻫَﻤﺎ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ َو َﺟَﺪ َﻣﺎًء َﻻ ﯾَ ْﻜﻔِﻲ َﻃَﻬﺎ َرﺗَُﻪ ا ْﺳﺘَ ْﻌَﻤﻠَُﻪ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑﺎً ﺛُﱠﻢ ﺗَﯿَـﱠﻤَﻢ‬ ‫َوأَ ْن ﯾَُﻜﻮ َن ﺑِﺘُ َﺮا ٍب َﻃُﻬﻮ ٍر ُﻣﺒَﺎ ٍح َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ُﻣ ْﺤﺘَ ِﺮ ٍق ﻟَُﻪ ُﻏﺒﺎ ٌر ﯾَ ْﻌﻠَ ُﻖ ﺑِﺎﻟﯿَِﺪ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺠْﺪ َذﻟِ َﻚ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ اﻟﻔَ ْﺮ َض ﻓَﻘَ ْﻂ‬
.ِ ‫َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺣ َﺴ ِﺐ َﺣﺎﻟِِﻪ، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺰﯾُﺪ ﻓِﻲ َﺻَﻼﺗِِﻪ َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻣ ْﺠ ِﺰ ٍئ، َوَﻻ إِ َﻋﺎَدَة َﻋﻠَْﯿﻪ‬ ‫َوﻓُ ُﺮو ُﺿﻪ ُ : َﻣ ْﺴ ُﺢ َو ْﺟِﻬِﻪ، َوﯾََﺪْﯾِﻪ إِﻟَﻰ ُﻛﻮ َﻋْﯿِﻪ، َوﺗَ ْﺮﺗِﯿ ٌﺐ، َوُﻣ َﻮاَﻻٌة ﻟِ َﺤَﺪ ٍث أَ ْﺻَﻐ َﺮ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ ﺑِﻘََﺪ ِر َﻣﺎ ﻓِﻲ‬ ‫ُو ُﺿﻮٍء، َوﺗَ ْﻌﯿِﯿ ُﻦ ﻧِﯿﱠِﺔ ا ْﺳﺘِﺒﺎ َﺣِﺔ ﻣﺎ ﯾَﺘَﯿَﱠﻤُﻢ ﻟَُﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺣَﺪ ٍث أَْو ﻧَﺠﺎ َﺳٍﺔ، ﻓَﻼ ﺗَ ْﻜﻔِﻲ ﻧِﯿﱠُﺔ أَ َﺣِﺪ ِﻫَﻤﺎ َﻋ ْﻦ اﻵ َﺧ ِﺮ، َوإ ْن‬
.َ ‫ﻧَ َﻮا ُﻫَﻤﺎ أَ ْﺟ َﺰأ‬ ‫َوﯾُـْﺒ ِﻄﻠُُﻪ ﻣﺎ ﯾُـْﺒ ِﻄ ُﻞ اﻟ ُﻮ ُﺿﻮَء، َو ُﺧ ُﺮو ُج اﻟ َﻮْﻗ ِﺖ، َو ُوﺟﻮُد اﻟَﻤﺎِء إِ ْن ﺗَﯿَـﱠﻤَﻢ ﻟِﻔَْﻘِﺪِه، َو َز َوا ُل اﻟُﻤﺒِﯿ ِﺢ ﻟَُﻪ، َو َﺧﻠْ ُﻊ‬
.ِ ‫َﻣﺎ ﯾُ ْﻤ َﺴ ُﺢ َﻋﻠَْﯿﻪ‬
Removal of Najāsah Seven washes are required for everything contaminated by najāsah so long as they cleanse it. If not, then it is washed until purified with ṭahūr water coupled with scratching and scrubbing if needed (as long as the location is not damaged) and wringing absorbent material (outside of the water source) after every wash if possible. One of the washes must be done with ṭahūr earth if the soiled object was contaminated by a dog or a swine. A remaining taste is detrimental, but not a color, smell, or both if difficult to remove. It is sufficient to douse the urine of a baby boy (who has yet to eat food due to craving) with water until soaked. Rocks, basins, and land which have been soiled by liquid, even that of a dog or a swine, are to be sprayed with an abundant amount of water or until its color and smell are removed, as long as it is not impossible to remove one or the other. If the water is still present i.e. on the boy’s urine, land, etc., they become purified even with the presence of the water.
Land is not purified by the sun, wind, or due to drying. Najāsah is not purified with fire; if so, its ash is najis. Alcohol is purified when it naturally turns to vinegar or due to moving it without intending acetification. Its container is similar [18] . If najāsah is concealed, it must be washed until it has surely been properly cleaned.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﯾُ ْﺸﺘَ َﺮ ُط ﻟُِﻜ ﱢﻞ ُﻣﺘَﻨَ ﱢﺠ ٍﺲ َﺳْﺒ ُﻊ َﻏ َﺴَﻼ ٍت إِ ْن أْﻧﻘَ ْﺖ، َوإِﱠﻻ ﻓَ َﺤﺘﻰ ﺗُْﻨﻘَﻰ ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء َﻃُﻬﻮ ٍر َﻣ َﻊ َﺣ ﱟﺖ َوﻗَ ْﺮ ٍص ﻟِ َﺤﺎ َﺟٍﺔ، إ ْن‬ ‫ﻟَﻢ ﯾَﺘَ َﻀ ﱠﺮ ْر اﻟَﻤ َﺤ َﻞ، َو َﻋ ْﺼ ٍﺮ َﻣ َﻊ إ ْﻣَﻜﺎ ٍن ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ﺗَ َﺸ ﱠﺮ َب ُﻛ ﱠﻞ َﻣ ﱠﺮٍة َﺧﺎ ِر َج اﻟَﻤﺎِء، َوَﻛ ْﻮ ُن إِ ْﺣَﺪا َﻫﺎ ﻓِﻲ ُﻣﺘَﻨَ ﱢﺠ ٍﺲ‬ ‫ﺑَِﻜﻠْ ٍﺐ أَْو ِﺧْﻨ ِﺰﯾ ٍﺮ ﺑِﺘُ َﺮا ٍب َﻃُﻬﻮر ٍ . َوﯾَ ُﻀ ﱡﺮ ﺑَﻘَﺎُء َﻃ ْﻌٍﻢ َﻻ ﻟَْﻮ ٍن أَْو ِرﯾـ ٍﺢ أَْو ُﻫَﻤﺎ َﻋ ْﺠﺰا ً. َوﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ ﻓِﻲ‬ ‫ﺑَ ْﻮ ِل ُﻏَﻼٍم ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَْﺄُﻛ ْﻞ َﻃَﻌﺎﻣﺎً ﻟِ َﺸ ْﻬ َﻮٍة ﻧَ ْﻀ ُﺤُﻪ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻏ ْﻤ ُﺮُه ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء، َوﻓِﻲ ﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮ َﺻ ْﺨ ٍﺮ َوأَ ْﺣ َﻮا ٍض َوأَ ْر ٍض‬ ‫ﺗَﻨَ ﱠﺠ َﺴ ْﺖ ﺑَِﻤﺎﺋِــ ٍﻊ، َوﻟَﻮ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻛﻠْ ٍﺐ أَْو ِﺧْﻨ ِﺰﯾ ٍﺮ ُﻣَﻜﺎﺛَ َﺮﺗُُﻬَﻤﺎ ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء َﺣﺘﱠﻰ ﯾَْﺬ َﻫ َﺐ ﻟَْﻮ ُن اﻟﻨﱠ َﺠﺎ َﺳِﺔ َو ِرﯾ ُﺤَﻬﺎ، َﻣﺎ ﻟَْﻢ‬ ‫ﯾَ ْﻌ َﺠ ْﺰ َﻋ ْﻦ إِْذ َﻫﺎﺑِِﻬَﻤﺎ أَْو إِْذ َﻫﺎ ِب أَ َﺣِﺪ ِﻫَﻤﺎ، َوﻟَْﻮ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ َﺰ ْل اﻟَﻤﺎُء ﻓِﯿِﻬَﻤﺎ أَ ْي ﻓِﻲ ﺑَ ْﻮ ِل اﻟُﻐَﻼِم َوﻓِﻲ اﻷَ ْر ِض‬
‫َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮ َﻫﺎ، ﻓَﯿَ ْﻄُﻬ َﺮا ِن َﻣ َﻊ ﺑَﻘَﺎِء اﻟَﻤﺎِء َﻋﻠَﯿِﻬَﻢ ا .‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﺗَ ْﻄُﻬ ُﺮ أَ ْر ٌض ﺑِ َﺸ ْﻤ ٍﺲ َو ِرﯾـ ٍﺢ َو َﺟﻔَﺎ ٍف، َوَﻻ ﻧَ َﺠﺎ َﺳٌﺔ ﺑِﻨَﺎ ٍر ﻓَ َﺮَﻣﺎُد َﻫﺎ ﻧَ ِﺠﺲ ٌ. َوﺗَ ْﻄُﻬ ُﺮ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺮٌة اْﻧﻘَﻠَﺒَ ْﺖ‬
‫َﺧ‪‬ﻼ ﺑِﻨَْﻔ ِﺴَﻬﺎ أَْو ﺑِﻨَْﻘ ٍﻞ َﻻ ﻟِﻘَ ْﺼِﺪ اﻟﺘﱠ ْﺨﻠِﯿ ِﻞ، َوَدﻧﱡَﻬﺎ ِﻣْﺜﻠَُﻬﺎ، َوإِ ْن ُﺧﻔِﯿَ ْﺖ ﻧَ َﺠﺎ َﺳٌﺔ َﻏ َﺴ َﻞ َﺣﺘَﻰ ﯾِﺘَﯿَﻘﱠ َﻦ َﻏ ْﺴﻠََﻪ ا .‬
‫‪Various Impurities‬‬ ‫‪Liquid intoxicants, as well as birds and beasts (that are inedible and‬‬ ‫,‪physically larger than a cat), are najis. Every carcass, besides humans‬‬ ‫‪fish, and locusts, is najis. A small amount, per custom, of dirt from the‬‬ ‫‪roadways, which is known to be najis, is overlooked; otherwise it is ṭāhir‬‬ ‫. ‪[19]‬‬ ‫‪The leftovers of a ṭāhir animal are not disliked i.e. their excess food and‬‬ ‫,.‪drink, except for that of non-sequestered chickens and mice. If a cat, etc‬‬ ‫‪or a child were to eat najāsah and then drink from a small amount of‬‬ ‫.‪water, it would be considered ṭāhir—even if before leaving‬‬
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫اﻟُﻤ ْﺴِﻜ ُﺮ اﻟَﻤﺎﺋِــ ُﻊ َوَﻣﺎ َﻻ ﯾُ ْﺆَﻛ ُﻞ ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟ ﱠﻄْﯿ ِﺮ َواﻟﺒََﻬﺎﺋِـِﻢ ِﻣﱠﻤﺎ ﻓَ ْﻮ َق اﻟِﻬ ﱢﺮ ِﺧﻠْﻘًَﺔ ﻧَ ِﺠ ٌﺲ، َوُﻛ ﱡﻞ َﻣْﯿﺘٍَﺔ ﻧَ ِﺠ َﺴٌﺔ َﻏْﯿ َﺮ‬ ‫َﻣْﯿﺘَِﺔ اﻵَدِﻣ ﱢﻲ َواﻟ ﱠﺴَﻤ ِﻚ َواﻟ َﺠ َﺮاد ِ. َوﯾُ ْﻌﻔَﻰ َﻋ ْﻦ ﯾَ ِﺴﯿ ِﺮ ِﻃﯿ ِﻦ َﺷﺎ ِر ٍع ُﻋ ْﺮﻓﺎً إِ ْن ُﻋﻠَِﻤ ْﺖ ﻧَ َﺠﺎ َﺳﺘُُﻪ َوإِﱠﻻ ﻓَُﻬ َﻮ‬
‫َﻃﺎ ِﻫﺮ ٌ.‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﻜ َﺮُه ُﺳ ْﺆ ُر َﺣﯿَﻮا ٍن َﻃﺎ ِﻫ ٍﺮ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﻓَ ْﻀﻠَُﺔ َﻃﻌﺎِﻣِﻪ َو َﺷﺮاﺑِِﻪ َﻏﯿ َﺮ َد ﱠﺟﺎ َﺟٍﺔ ُﻣ َﺨﱠﻼٍة َوﻓَْﺄ ٍر، َوﻟَﻮ أََﻛ َﻞ ِﻫ ﱞﺮ‬
‫َوﻧَ ْﺤ ُﻮُه أَْو ِﻃْﻔ ٌﻞ ﻧَ َﺠﺎ َﺳٌﺔ ﺛُﱠﻢ َﺷ ِﺮ َب َوﻟَْﻮ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ أَ ْن ﯾَِﻐﯿ َﺐ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻣﺎٍء ﯾَ ِﺴﯿ ٍﺮ ﻓَ َﻄُﻬﻮر ٌ.‬
‫‪Blood of Women‬‬

The earliest age of menstruation is nine and the latest is 50. A pregnant woman does not menstruate. Its shortest period is one day and night and the longest is 15 days; most of the time it is six or seven. The shortest period of purity between two menstrual cycles is 13 days; most of the time it is the remainder of the month. There is no limit on how long it can be. It is impermissible for her to perform prayer (which does not have to be made up), to fast (which must be made up), or to have intercourse with her (which requires one or one-half [20] dinār as an expiation [21] ); other intimate acts are however permitted. Postpartum bleeding has no limit on its shortest duration; its maximum is 40 days. It is ruled as such when whatever is delivered possesses human characteristics. Becoming clean during its duration is considered purity; intercourse during it is disliked. It is treated like menstruation in its rulings except for both the marital waiting period and maturity.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،‫َوأَﻗَ ﱡﻞ ِﺳ ﱢﻦ َﺣْﯿ ٍﺾ ﺗَﻤﺎُم ﺗَ ْﺴ ِﻊ ِﺳﻨِﯿ َﻦ، َوأَْﻛﺜَ ُﺮُه َﺧ ْﻤ ُﺴﻮ َن َﺳﻨًَﺔ َواﻟ َﺤﺎِﻣ ُﻞ َﻻ ﺗَ ِﺤﯿﺾ ُ . َوأَﻗﻠﱡُﻪ ﯾَ ْﻮٌم َوﻟَْﯿﻠٌَﺔ‬ ،ً‫َوأَْﻛﺜَ ُﺮُه َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴَﺔ َﻋ َﺸ َﺮ ﯾَ ْﻮﻣﺎً، وﻏﺎﻟِﺒُُﻪ ِﺳ ﱞﺖ أَْو َﺳْﺒﻊ ٌ. َوأَﻗَ ﱡﻞ اﻟ ﱡﻄ ْﻬ ِﺮ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟ َﺤـْﯿ َﻀﺘَﯿ ِﻦ ﺛَﻼﺛََﺔ َﻋ َﺸ َﺮ ﯾَﻮﻣﺎ‬
.ِ ‫َو َﻏﺎﻟِﺒُُﻪ ﺑَﻘِﯿﱠُﺔ اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﻬ ِﺮ، َوﻻ َﺣﱠﺪ ِﻷ ْﻛﺜَ ِﺮه‬ ‫وﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم َﻋﻠَﯿَﻬﺎ ﻓِ ْﻌ ُﻞ َﺻَﻼٍة، َوَﻻ ﺗَْﻘ ِﻀﯿَﻬﺎ، َوﻓِ ْﻌ ُﻞ َﺻ ْﻮٍم َوﺗَْﻘ ِﻀﯿِﻪ، َو َو ْﻃ ُﺆ َﻫﺎ ﻓِﻲ ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍج، َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﻓِﯿِﻪ ِدﯾﻨَﺎ ٌر أَْو‬
.ُ ‫ﻧِ ْﺼﻔُُﻪ َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرًة، َوﺗُﺒَﺎ ُح اﻟُﻤﺒَﺎ َﺷ َﺮُة ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ُدوﻧَﻪ‬ ‫َواﻟﻨﱢﻔَﺎ ُس َﻻ َﺣﱠﺪ ِﻷَﻗَﻠﱢِﻪ، َوأَْﻛﺜَ ُﺮُه أَ ْرﺑَُﻌﻮ َن ﯾَ ْﻮﻣﺎً، َوﯾَْﺜﺒُ ُﺖ ُﺣ ْﻜُﻤُﻪ ﺑِ َﻮ ْﺿ ِﻊ َﻣﺎ ﯾَﺘَﺒَﯿﱠ ُﻦ ﻓِﯿِﻪ َﺧﻠْ ُﻖ اِﻹْﻧ َﺴﺎ ِن، َواﻟﻨﱠﻘَﺎُء‬
.ٍ ‫َزَﻣﻨُُﻪ ُﻃ ْﻬ ٌﺮ، َوﯾُﻜ َﺮُه اﻟ َﻮ ْطُء ﻓِﯿِﻪ َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻛ َﺤْﯿ ٍﺾ ﻓِﻲ أَ ْﺣَﻜﺎِﻣِﻪ َﻏْﯿ َﺮ ِﻋﱠﺪٍة َوﺑُﻠُﻮغ‬
Prayer The five prayers are obligatory upon every Muslim of legal capacity except for anyone who is menstruating or experiencing postpartum bleeding. Whoever, in denial, abandons it has committed apostasy and is subject to apostasy laws.
‫ِﻛﺘَﺎ ُب اﻟ ﱠﺼﻼِة‬ ‫ﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ اﻟ َﺨ ْﻤ ُﺲ َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ ُﻣَﻜﻠﱠ ٍﻒ إِﱠﻻ َﺣﺎﺋِﻀﺎً َوﻧُﻔَ َﺴﺎَء، َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﺗَ َﺮَﻛَﻬﺎ ُﺟ ُﺤﻮداً ﻓَﻘَْﺪ ا ْرﺗَﱠﺪ، َو َﺟ َﺮ ْت َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ‬
.َ ‫أَ ْﺣَﻜﺎُم اﻟُﻤ ْﺮﺗَﱢﺪﯾﻦ‬

Adhān and Iqāmah The adhān and iqāmah are both communal obligations upon free men; it is recommended for individuals and during travel. They are not valid unless in sequence and continuous, per custom, with an intention by a Muslim male who is sane, discerning, speaking, upright (even if only apparently so), and called after the time enters, except for fajr, which is valid after mid-night. The adhān comprises 15 phrases without tarjīʿ [22] . The iqāmah comprises 11 phrases without doubling. Tarjīʿ is permissible in the adhān, as is doubling the iqāmah.
After the adhān is made, it is impermissible to exit the masjid without an excuse or intent to return. Calling the adhān in the right ear of a newborn and the iqāmah in the left is recommended.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫اﻷََذا ُن َواِﻹﻗَﺎَﻣُﺔ ﻓَ ْﺮ َﺿﺎ ِﻛﻔَﺎﯾٍَﺔ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ ﱢﺮ َﺟﺎ ِل اﻷَ ْﺣ َﺮار ِ . َوﯾُ َﺴﻨﱠﺎ ِن ﻟُِﻤْﻨﻔَ ِﺮٍد َو َﺳﻔَﺮاً، َوﻻ ﯾَ ِﺼ ﱠﺤﺎ ِن إِﱠﻻ‬ ‫َﻣ َﺮﺗﱠﺒَْﯿ ِﻦ ُﻣﺘَﻮاﻟِﯿَْﯿ ِﻦ ُﻋ ْﺮﻓﺎً، ﺑِﻨِﯿﱠٍﺔ ِﻣ ْﻦ َذَﻛ ٍﺮ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ َﻋﺎﻗِ ٍﻞ ُﻣَﻤﯿﱢـ ٍﺰ ﻧَﺎ ِﻃ ٍﻖ َﻋْﺪ ٍل َوﻟَﻮ َﻇﺎ ِﻫﺮاً، ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ُد ُﺧﻮ ِل َوْﻗ ٍﺖ‬ ‫ﻟَِﻐﯿ ِﺮ ﻓَ ْﺠ ٍﺮ َوﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ ﻟَُﻪ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﻧِ ْﺼ ِﻒ اﻟﻠﱠْﯿ ِﻞ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺲ َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮَة َﻛﻠَِﻤًﺔ ﺑَﻼ ﺗَ ْﺮ ِﺟﯿ ٍﻊ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ إِ ْﺣَﺪى َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮَة ﺑِﻼ‬
. ‫ﺗَْﺜﻨِﯿٍَﺔ، َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ﺗَ ْﺮ ِﺟﯿُﻌُﻪ وﺗَْﺜﻨِﯿَﺘُﻪ ا‬ ‫َو َﺣ ُﺮَم ُﺧﺮو ٌج ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪُه ﺑَِﻼ ُﻋْﺬ ٍر أَْو ﻧَﯿﱠِﺔ ُر ُﺟﻮع ٍ. َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ أََذا ٌن ﻓِﻲ ﯾُ ْﻤﻨَﻰ أُُذﻧَﻲ َﻣ ْﻮﻟُﻮٍد َﺣْﯿ ُﺚ‬
. ‫ﯾُﻮﻟَُﺪ، َوإِﻗَﺎَﻣٌﺔ ﻓِﻲ اﻟﯿُ ْﺴ َﺮ ى‬
Prerequisites, Pillars, Obligations, Recommendations The six prerequisites for the validity of prayer include: purity from a ḥadath; entry of the time; concealment of the ʿawrah [23] ; avoidance of impurities; facing the qiblah; and making an intention—its location is the heart, its reality is a resolution to do something, and it is not waived in any situation. Its prerequisites are: Islām, sanity, and discernment. The time to make it is at the onset of worship or just before it.
The 14 pillars of prayer are: standing in an obligatory prayer; takbīrat aliḥrām [24] ; recitation of al-Fātiḥah; bowing; raising from it; straightness; prostration; raising from it; sitting between the two prostrations; tranquility in action i.e. stillness even if briefly; the final tashahhud (the

pillar of which is, “O Allāh send Your prayers upon Muhammad,” after what is sufficient of the first tashahhud which is, “All greetings are for Allāh, peace upon you, O prophet, and the mercy of Allāh. Peace be upon us and upon Allāh’s righteous servants. I bear witness that there is no deity worthy of worship but Allāh and that Muhammad is the messenger of Allāh.”); sitting for it and the two salāms [25] ; the two salāms; and sequence.
It has eight obligations: takbīr (besides iḥrām); tasmīʿ [26] (for the Imām and individual); taḥmīd [27] ; the first tasbīḥah [28] in bowing and prostration; “My Lord forgive me” between the two prostrations (for everyone); the first tashahhud; and its sitting. Its recommendations (both statements and actions) do not invalidate it if they are categorically abandoned.
It has 11 recommended statements: an opening supplication; seeking refuge; saying “In the name of Allāh”; saying “āmīn”; reciting a chapter (in fajr, Friday, ‘Eid, voluntary prayers, and the first two of both maghrib and four-rakʿah prayers); audible recitation of the Imām; the statement “[A praise that] fills the heavens and the earth and what lies between them and whatever else You please” after the taḥmīd (for a non-follower); what exceeds one tasbīḥ; asking forgiveness; supplication in the last tashahhud; and qunūt [29] in witr.
There are 45 recommended actions and manners. It is disliked for anyone praying to turn, close their eyes, or touch pebbles, etc.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،‫َو ُﺷ ُﺮو ُط ِﺻ ﱠﺤِﺔ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼِة ِﺳﺘﱠﺔ ٌ: َﻃَﻬﺎ َرُة اﻟ َﺤَﺪ ِث، َوُد ُﺧﻮ ُل اﻟ َﻮْﻗ ِﺖ، َو َﺳْﺘ ُﺮ اﻟَﻌ ْﻮ َرِة، َوا ْﺟﺘِﻨَﺎ ُب اﻟﻨﱠ َﺠﺎ َﺳِﺔ‬ ‫َوا ْﺳﺘِْﻘﺒَﺎ ُل اﻟﻘِْﺒﻠَِﺔ، َواﻟﻨﱢﯿﱠُﺔ، َوَﻣ َﺤﻠﱡَﻬﺎ اﻟﻘَﻠْ ُﺐ، َو َﺣﻘِﯿﻘَﺘَُﻪ ا : اﻟَﻌ ْﺰُم َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ َﺸ ْﻲِء، َوَﻻ ﺗَ ْﺴﻘُ ُﻂ ﺑِ َﺤﺎل ٍ. َو ُﺷ ُﺮ ُﻃَﻬﺎ‬
.ٍ ‫اِﻹ ْﺳَﻼُم، َواﻟَﻌْﻘ ُﻞ، َواﻟﺘَ ْﻤﯿِﯿ ُﺰ، َو َزَﻣﻨُﻬﺎ أَﱠو ُل اﻟِﻌﺒَﺎَدِة أَْو ﻗُﺒَْﯿﻠَُﻬﺎ ﺑِﯿَ ِﺴﯿﺮ‬ ‫َوأَ ْرَﻛﺎ ُن اﻟ ﱠﺼََﻼِة أَ ْرﺑََﻌَﺔ َﻋ َﺸﺮ َ : ﻗِﯿَﺎٌم ﻓِﻲ ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍض، َوﺗَ ْﻜﺒِﯿ َﺮُة اﻹِ ْﺣ َﺮاِم، َوﻗِ َﺮاَءُة اﻟﻔَﺎﺗِ َﺤِﺔ، َو ُرُﻛﻮ ٌع، َو َرْﻓ ٌﻊ‬ ‫ِﻣْﻨُﻪ، َوا ْﻋﺘَِﺪا ٌل، َو ُﺳ ُﺠﻮٌد، َو َرْﻓ ٌﻊ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ، َو ُﺟﻠُﻮ ٌس ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺴ ْﺠَﺪﺗَْﯿ ِﻦ، َو ُﻃَﻤْﺄﻧِﯿﻨٌِﺔ ﻓِﻲ ﻓِ ْﻌ ٍﻞ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ اﻟ ﱡﺴُﻜﻮ ُن َوإِ ْن‬ ‫ﻗَ ﱠﻞ، َوﺗَ َﺸﱡﻬٌﺪ أَ ِﺧﯿ ٌﺮ، َو ُﺟﻠُﻮ ٌس ﻟَُﻪ، َوﻟِﻠﺘﱠ ْﺴﻠِﯿَﻤﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ َواﻟ ﱡﺮ ْﻛ ُﻦ ِﻣْﻨﻪ ُ : " اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ َﺻ ﱢﻞ َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻣ َﺤﱠﻤﺪ ٍ " ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪَﻣﺎ‬ ‫ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟﺘﱠ َﺸﱡﻬِﺪ اﻷَ ﱠو ِل، َواﻟُْﻤﺠ ِﺰ ُئ ِﻣْﻨﻪ ُ: " اﻟﺘﱠ ِﺤﯿﱠﺎ ُت ِﱠﷲِ، َﺳَﻼٌم َﻋﻠَْﯿ َﻚ أَﯾﱡَﻬﺎ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ﱡﻲ َو َر ْﺣَﻤُﺔ ا ﱠﷲِ، َﺳَﻼٌم‬ ،‫َﻋﻠَْﯿﻨَﺎ َو َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﻋﺒَﺎِد ا ﱠﷲِ اﻟ ﱠﺼﺎﻟِ ِﺤﯿ َﻦ، أَ ْﺷَﻬُﺪ أَ ْن َﻻ إِﻟََﻪ إِﱠﻻ ا ﱠﷲُ، َوأَ ﱠن ُﻣ َﺤﱠﻤﺪاً َر ُﺳﻮ ُل ا ﱠﷲ ِ" ، َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﺴﻠِﯿَﻤﺘَﺎ ِن‬
.ُ ‫َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﺮﺗِﯿﺐ‬

َُ ٌ

َ

ْ

َُ

‫َو َوا ِﺟﺒَﺎﺗَُﻬﺎ ﺛََﻤﺎﻧَﯿِﺔ ٌ : ﺗَ ْﻜﺒِﯿ ٌﺮ ﻟَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮ اِﻹ ْﺣ َﺮاِم، َوﺗَ ْﺴِﻤﯿ ٌﻊ ِﻹَﻣﺎٍم َوُﻣْﻨﻔَ ِﺮٍد، َوﺗَـ ْﺤِﻤﯿٌﺪ، َوﺗَ ْﺴﺒِﯿ َﺤﺔ أوﻟﻰ ﻓِﻲ‬ ‫ُرُﻛﻮ ٍع َو ُﺳ ُﺠﻮٍد، و َ" َر ﱢب ا ْﻏﻔِ ْﺮ ل ي " ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺴ ْﺠَﺪﺗَﯿ ِﻦ ﻟِﻠُْﻜ ﱢﻞ، َوﺗَ َﺸﱡﻬٌﺪ أَﱠو ٌل، َو ُﺟﻠُﻮ ٌس ﻟَﻪ ُ. َو ُﺳﻨَﻨَُﻪ ا‬ ،‫: أَْﻗ َﻮا ٌل َوأَْﻓَﻌﺎ ٌل َﻻ ﺗَْﺒ ُﻄ ُﻞ ﺑِﺘَ ْﺮ ِك َﺷ ْﻲٍء ِﻣْﻨَﻬﺎ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎ ً. ﻓَ ُﺴﻨَ ُﻦ اﻷَْﻗﻮا ِل إِ ْﺣَﺪى َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮَة َو ِﻫﻲ َ : ا ْﺳﺘِْﻔﺘَﺎ ٌح‬ ‫َوﺗََﻌ ﱡﻮٌذ، َوﺑَ ْﺴَﻤﻠٌَﺔ، َوﻗَﻮل ُ : " آِﻣﯿﻦ َ" ، َوﻗِ َﺮاَءُة ُﺳﻮ َرٍة ﻓِﻲ ﻓَ ْﺠ ٍﺮ َو ُﺟُﻤَﻌٍﺔ َو ِﻋﯿٍﺪ، َوﺗَ َﻄ ﱡﻮ ٍع، َوأُوﻟَﺘَ ْﻲ‬ ‫َﻣ ْﻐ ِﺮ ٍب َو ُرﺑَﺎ ِﻋﯿﱠٍﺔ، َو َﺟ ْﻬ ُﺮ إَِﻣﺎٍم ﺑِﻘِ َﺮاَءٍة، َوﻗَﻮ ُل َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﻣْﺄُﻣﻮٍم ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟﺘﱠ ْﺤِﻤﯿﺪ ِ : " ِﻣ ْﻞَء اﻟ ﱠﺴﻤﺎِء، َوِﻣ ْﻞَء‬ ‫اﻷَ ْر ِض، َوِﻣ ْﻞَء َﻣﺎ ِﺷْﺌ َﺖ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﻲٍء ﺑَ ْﻌﺪ ُ" َوَﻣﺎ َزاَد َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻣ ﱠﺮٍة ﻓِﻲ ﺗَ ْﺴﺒِﯿ ٍﺢ، َو ُﺳ َﺆا ُل اﻟَﻤ ْﻐﻔِ َﺮِة، َوُد َﻋﺎٌء ﻓِﻲ‬
.ٍ ‫ﺗَ َﺸﱡﻬٍﺪ أَ ِﺧﯿ ٍﺮ، َوﻗُﻨُﻮ ٌت ﻓِﻲ ِوْﺗﺮ‬ ‫َو ُﺳﻨَ ُﻦ اﻷَْﻓَﻌﺎ ِل َﻣ َﻊ اﻟَﻬْﯿﺌَﺎ ِت َﺧ ْﻤ ٌﺲ َوأَ ْرﺑَُﻌﻮن َ . َوﯾُ ْﻜ َﺮُه ﻟِﻠُﻤ َﺼﻠﱢﻲ اﻟْﺘِﻔَﺎ ٌت، َوﺗَ ْﻐِﻤﯿ ُﺾ َﻋْﯿﻨَْﯿِﻪ، َوَﻣ ﱡﺲ‬
.َ ‫اﻟ َﺤ َﺼﻰ، َوﻧﺤ ُﻮ َذﻟِﻚ‬
Prostration of Forgetfulness The prostration of forgetfulness is recommended due to forgetfully making a legislated statement in the wrong place, permitted if a recommended act is abandoned, and obligatory if a bowing, prostration, standing, or sitting is added.
The prayer is invalidated if the obligatory prostration of forgetfulness is intentionally abandoned, the time of which is before the salām. If someone gets up, abandoning or forgetting the tashahhud, they are obliged to return to perform it. Returning is disliked if they have stood completely, and impermissible if they have begun recitation. If they return after beginning recitation, the prayer is invalidated — except for that of someone forgetful or ignorant.
If someone produces a ḥadath, speaks (even if forgetfully), audibly laughs, or clears their throat without need (producing two or more letters), it is invalidated, but not if they sleep and then speak, weep out of reverential fear, or are overcome by coughing, sneezing, or yawning, etc. Anyone who doubts in a pillar or number of rakʿahs is to act upon certainty i.e. the least amount. Doubt has no effect after its completion.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،ً‫ﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ُﺳ ُﺠﻮُد اﻟ ﱠﺴ ْﻬ ِﻮ ﻟِﻠُﻤ َﺼﻠﱢﻲ إَِذا أَﺗَﻰ ﺑِﻘَ ْﻮ ٍل َﻣ ْﺸ ُﺮ ْو ٍع ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﻣ َﺤﻠﱢِﻪ َﺳ ْﻬﻮاً، َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح إَِذا ﺗَ َﺮ َك َﻣ ْﺴﻨُ ْﻮﻧﺎ‬
.ً ‫َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ إَِذا َزاَد ُرُﻛ ْﻮﻋﺎً أَْو ُﺳ ُﺠ ْﻮداً أَْو ﻗِﯿَﺎﻣﺎً أَْو ﻗُُﻌ ْﻮدا‬

‫ﱢ‬

َ َ َ ُ‫ﱠ ﱡ‬

َُ ُُ

‫َوﺗَْﺒ ُﻄﻞ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼُة ﺑِﺘََﻌﱡﻤِﺪ ﺗَ ْﺮ ِك ُﺳ ُﺠ ْﻮِد اﻟ ﱠﺴ ْﻬ ِﻮ اﻟ َﻮا ِﺟ ِﺐ اﻟِﺬي َﻣ َﺤﻠُﻪ ﻗْﺒﻞ اﻟ ﱠﺴَﻼِم، َوإِ ْن ﻧََﻬ َﺾ اﻟُﻤ َﺼﻠﻲ َﻋ ْﻦ‬ ،‫ﺗَ ْﺮ ِك ﺗَ َﺸﱡﻬٍﺪ أَْو ﻧَﺎ ِﺳﯿﺎً ﻟَِﺰَﻣُﻪ اﻟ ﱡﺮ ُﺟﻮ ُع ﻟِﯿَﺘَ َﺸﱠﻬَﺪ، َوُﻛ ِﺮَه إِ ْن ا ْﺳﺘَﺘَﱠﻢ ﻗَﺎﺋِﻤﺎً، َو َﺣ ُﺮَم إِ ْن َﺷ َﺮ َع ﻓِﻲ اﻟﻘِ َﺮاَءِة‬
.ٍ ‫َوﺑَ َﻄﻠَ ْﺖ ﺑِﺎﻟ ﱡﺮ ُﺟﻮ ِع ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟ ﱠﺸ ُﺮو ِع ﻓِﻲ اﻟﻘِ َﺮاَءِة َﺻَﻼُة َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ﻧَﺎ ٍس َو َﺟﺎ ِﻫﻞ‬ ‫َوإِ ْن أَ ْﺣَﺪ َث أَو ﺗََﻜﻠﱠَﻢ َوﻟَْﻮ َﺳ ْﻬﻮاً أَْو ﻗَ ْﻬﻘََﻪ أَْو ﺗَﻨَ ْﺤﻨَ َﺢ ﺑَِﻼ َﺣﺎ َﺟٍﺔ ﻓَﺒَﺎ َن َﺣ ْﺮﻓَﺎ ِن ﺑَ َﻄﻠَ ْﺖ، َﻻ إِ ْن ﻧَﺎَم ﻓَﺘََﻜﻠﱠَﻢ أَْو‬
.ُ ‫اْﻧﺘَ َﺤ َﺐ َﺧ ْﺸﯿًَﺔ أَْو َﻏﻠَﺒَُﻪ ُﺳَﻌﺎ ٌل و ُﻋ َﻄﺎ ٌس أَْو ﺗَﺜَﺎ ُؤ ٌب َوﻧَ ْﺤ ُﻮه‬ . ‫َوﯾَْﺒﻨِﻲ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟﯿَﻘِْﯿ ِﻦ َو ُﻫ َﻮ اﻷَﻗَ ﱡﻞ َﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ﱠﻚ ﻓِﻲ ُر ْﻛ ٍﻦ أَْو َﻋَﺪِد َرَﻛَﻌﺎ ٍت، َوَﻻ أَﺛَ َﺮ ﻟِﻠ ﱠﺸ ﱢﻚ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﻓَﺮا ِﻏَﻪ ا‬
Recommended Prayers The most virtuous physical voluntary act after military service and seeking knowledge is voluntary prayer. The most emphasized of which is the eclipse prayer, followed by seeking rain, tarāwīḥ, and then witr (the least of which is one rakʿah and the most is 11). The least complete is three with two salāms; one is permitted when prayed continuously. Its period is between ʿishāʾ and fajr. Qunūt is preferably made after bowing, saying aloud, “O Allāh, we seek Your help, Your guidance and Your forgiveness, and repent to You. We believe in You, trust in You, and we praise You beneficently. We thank You and do not deny You. O Allāh, You alone do we worship and to You we pray and bow down prostrate. To You we hasten to worship and to serve. Our hope is for Your mercy and we fear Your punishment. Surely, Your inevitable punishment of the disbelievers is at hand.”
“O Allāh, guide us with those whom You have guided, and strengthen us with those whom You have given strength. Take us to Your care with those whom You have taken to Your care. Bless us in what You have given. Surely, You command and are not commanded. None whom You have committed to Your care shall be humiliated and none whom You have taken as an enemy shall taste glory. You are Blessed, Our Lord, and Exalted. O Allāh, we seek refuge with Your pleasure from Your anger. We seek refuge in Your forgiveness from Your punishment. We seek refuge in You from You. We cannot count Your praises, You are as You have praised Yourself.”
Then prayers are sent upon the Prophet (peace be upon him). The follower says “āmīn”. The individual singularizes the pronoun. The face is then wiped over with both hands, while both in and out of prayer.

‫‪There are 10 emphasized routine prayers: two rakʿahs before ẓuhr; two‬‬ ‫‪rakʿahs after it; two rakʿahs after maghrib; two rakʿahs after ʿishāʾ; and‬‬ ‫‪two rakʿahs before fajr. The most emphasized of them is fajr, followed by‬‬ ‫.‪maghrib and then the others‬‬ ‫.‪Tarāwīḥ consists of 20 rakʿahs made in congregation during Ramaḍān‬‬ ‫‪Salām is made for every two rakʿahs with an intention before each set. Its‬‬ ‫‪time is between the emphasized routine prayer of ʿishāʾ and witr in the‬‬ ‫‪masjid; the beginning of the night is preferred. Subsequently, witr is made‬‬ ‫.‪in congregation‬‬
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ﺗَ َﻄ ﱡﻮ ِع اﻟﺒََﺪ ِن ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟ ِﺠَﻬﺎِد َواﻟِﻌﻠْـِﻢ َﺻَﻼُة اﻟﺘﱠ َﻄ ﱡﻮ ِع، َوآَﻛُﺪ َﻫﺎ ُﻛ ُﺴﻮ ٌف، ﻓَﺎ ْﺳﺘِ ْﺴﻘَﺎٌء، ﻓَﺘَ َﺮا ِوْﯾ ٌﺢ، ﻓَ ِﻮْﺗ ٌﺮ،‬
‫َوأَﻗَﻠﱡُﻪ َر ْﻛَﻌٌﺔ، َوأَْﻛﺜَ ُﺮُه إِ َﺣَﺪى َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮَة، َوأَْدﻧَﻰ اﻟَﻜَﻤﺎ ِل ﺛََﻼ ٌث ﺑِ َﺴَﻼَﻣْﯿ ِﻦ، َوﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز ﺑِ َﻮا ِﺣٍﺪ َﺳ ْﺮدا ً.‬ ‫َو َوْﻗﺘُُﻪ َﻣﺎ ﺑَْﯿ ِﻦ اﻟِﻌ َﺸﺎِء َواﻟﻔَ ْﺠ ِﺮ، َوﯾْﻘﻨُ ُﺖ ﻓِﯿِﻪ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟ ﱡﺮُﻛﻮ ِع ﻧَْﺪﺑﺎً ﻓَﯿَﻘُﻮ ُل َﺟ ْﻬﺮا ً : " اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ إِﻧﱠﺎ ﻧَ ْﺴﺘَِﻌْﯿﻨُ ُﻚ‬ ‫َوﻧَ ْﺴﺘَ ْﻬِﺪْﯾ َﻚ َوﻧَ ْﺴﺘَ ْﻐﻔِ ُﺮ َك، َوﻧَﺘُ ْﻮ ُب إِﻟَْﯿ َﻚ، َوﻧُ ْﺆِﻣ ُﻦ ﺑِ َﻚ، َوﻧَﺘَ َﻮﱠﻛ ُﻞ َﻋﻠْﯿ َﻚ، َوﻧُْﺜﻨِﻲ َﻋﻠَْﯿ َﻚ اﻟ َﺨْﯿ َﺮ ُﻛﻠﱠُﻪ، َوﻧَ ْﺸُﻜ ُﺮ َك‬ ‫َوﻻ ﻧَ ْﻜﻔُ ُﺮ َك، اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ إِﯾﱠﺎ َك ﻧَ ْﻌﺒُُﺪ، َوﻟَ َﻚ ﻧُ َﺼﻠﱢﻲ َوﻧَ ْﺴ ُﺠُﺪ، َوإِﻟَْﯿ َﻚ ﻧَ ْﺴَﻌﻰ وﻧَ ْﺤﻔُِﺪ، ﻧَ ْﺮ ُﺟﻮ َر ْﺣَﻤﺘَ َﻚ َوﻧَ ْﺨ َﺸﻰ‬
‫َﻋَﺬاﺑَ َﻚ، إِ ﱠن َﻋَﺬاﺑَ َﻚ اﻟ ِﺠﱠﺪ ﺑِﺎﻟُﻜﻔﱠﺎ ِر ُﻣﻠْ ِﺤﻖ ٌ."‬ ‫" اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ ا ْﻫِﺪﻧَﺎ ﻓِْﯿَﻤ ْﻦ َﻫَﺪْﯾ َﺖ، َو َﻋﺎﻓِﻨَﺎ ﻓْﯿَﻤ ْﻦ َﻋﺎﻓَْﯿ َﺖ، َوﺗَ َﻮﻟﱠﻨَﺎ ﻓِْﯿَﻤ ْﻦ ﺗَ َﻮﻟﱠْﯿ َﺖ، َوﺑَﺎ ِر ْك ﻟَﻨَﺎ ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ أَ ْﻋ َﻄْﯿ َﺖ، َوﻗِﻨَﺎ‬ ‫َﺷ ﱠﺮ َﻣﺎ ﻗَ َﻀْﯿ َﺖ، إِﻧﱠ َﻚ ﺗَْﻘ ِﻀﻲ َوَﻻ ﯾُْﻘ َﻀﻰ َﻋﻠَْﯿ َﻚ، إِﻧﱠُﻪ َﻻ ﯾَِﺬ ﱡل َﻣ ْﻦ َواﻟَْﯿ َﺖ، َوَﻻ ﯾَِﻌ ﱡﺰ َﻣ ْﻦ َﻋﺎَدْﯾ َﺖ، ﺗَﺒَﺎ َر ْﻛ َﺖ‬ ‫َرﺑﱠﻨَﺎ َوﺗََﻌﺎﻟَْﯿ َﺖ، اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ إِﻧﱠﺎ ﻧَُﻌﻮُذ ﺑِ ِﺮ َﺿﺎ َك ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺳ َﺨ ِﻄ َﻚ، َوﺑَِﻌْﻔ ِﻮ َك ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻋﻘُﻮﺑَﺘِ َﻚ، َوﺑِ َﻚ ِﻣْﻨ َﻚ َﻻ ﻧُ ْﺤ ِﺼﻲ ﺛَﻨَﺎًءا‬
‫َﻋﻠَْﯿ َﻚ أَْﻧ َﺖ َﻛَﻤﺎ أْﺛﻨَْﯿ َﺖ َﻋﻠَﻰ ﻧَْﻔ ِﺴﻚ َ."‬ ‫ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُ َﺼﻠﱢﻲ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ّﻲ ِ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ َوﯾُ َﺆﱢﻣ ُﻦ َﻣْﺄُﻣ ْﻮٌم، َوﯾُْﻔ ِﺮُد ُﻣْﻨﻔَ ِﺮٌد اﻟ ﱠﻀِﻤﯿ َﺮ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَ ْﻤ َﺴ ُﺢ َو ْﺟَﻬُﻪ‬
‫ﺑِﯿََﺪْﯾِﻪ ُﻫﻨَﺎ َو َﺧﺎ ِر َج اﻟ ﱠﺼََﻼة ِ.‬ ‫َواﻟ ﱠﺮ َواﺗِ ُﺐ اﻟُﻤ َﺆﱠﻛَﺪُة َﻋ ْﺸﺮ ٌ: َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﺎ ِن ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟ ُﻈ ْﻬ ِﺮ، َو َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﺎ ِن ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َﻫﺎ، َو َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﺎ ِن ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟَﻤ ْﻐ ِﺮ ِب، َو َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﺎ ِن‬
‫ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟِﻌ َﺸﺎِء، َو َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﺎ ِن ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟﻔَ ْﺠ ِﺮ، َوآَﻛُﺪ َﻫﺎ اﻟﻔَ ْﺠ ُﺮ، ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻟَﻤ ْﻐ ِﺮ ُب ﺛُﱠﻢ َﺳ َﻮاء ٌ.‬
‫َواﻟﺘﱠ َﺮا ِوْﯾ ُﺢ ِﻋ ْﺸ ُﺮ ْو َن َر ْﻛَﻌًﺔ ﺑِ َﺮَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن َﺟَﻤﺎ َﻋًﺔ، ﯾُ َﺴﻠﱢُﻢ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ ُﻛ ﱠﻞ ﺛِْﻨﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ ﺑِﻨِﯿﱠٍﺔ أَﱠو َل ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ، َو َوْﻗﺘَُﻬﺎ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ‬ ‫ُﺳﻨﱠِﺔ ِﻋ َﺸﺎٍء َو ِوْﺗ ٍﺮ ﻓِﻲ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ، َوأَﱠو ُل اﻟﻠﱠﯿ ِﻞ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ، َوﯾُ ْﻮﺗِ ُﺮ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َﻫﺎ ﻓِﻲ َﺟَﻤﺎ َﻋﺔ ٍ.‬
‫‪Voluntary Prayers‬‬

Ṣalāt al-layl is the most virtuous. The last half of the night is better than the first. Qiyām al-layl [30] is recommended and commenced with two short rakʿahs; its intention is made before sleep. Abundant bowing and prostration are more virtuous than prolonged standing. Ṣalāt al-ḍuḥā is recommended every other day. It is, at least, two rakʿahs and, at most, eight. Its duration is from the end of the prohibited time until just before the zawāl. Taḥiyyat al-masjid [31] , Sunnat al-wuḍūʾ [32] , and praying between maghrib and ʿishāʾ prayers, considered a part of qiyām allayl, are recommended.
Ṣalāt al-istikhārah is recommended, even for something good, which is then done immediately after it. Ṣalāt al-ḥājah [33] , for Allāh the Most-High or for a fellow man, is recommended, as is ṣalāt al-tawbah [34] . The prostration of recitation, within a short break, is recommended for the reciter and listener. The prostration of gratitude is recommended when a blessing is renewed or harm is avoided.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َو َﺻَﻼُة اﻟﻠﱠْﯿ ِﻞ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ، َواﻟﻨﱢ ْﺼ ُﻒ اﻷَ ِﺧﯿ ُﺮ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻷَ ﱠو ِل، َوﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ﻗِﯿَﺎُم اﻟﻠﱠْﯿ ِﻞ، َواْﻓﺘِﺘَﺎ ُﺣُﻪ ﺑِ َﺮ ْﻛَﻌﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ‬
.ِ ‫َﺧﻔِﯿﻔَﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ، َوﻧِﯿﱠﺘُُﻪ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ اﻟﻨَﻮِم، َوَﻛْﺜ َﺮُة اﻟ ﱡﺮُﻛﻮ ِع َواﻟ ﱡﺴ ُﺠﻮِد أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻃﻮ ِل اﻟﻘِﯿَﺎم‬ ‫ﺎ، َوأَﻗَﻠﱡَﻬﺎ َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﺎ ِن، َوأَْﻛﺜَ ُﺮ َﻫﺎ ﺛََﻤﺎ ٍن، َو َوْﻗﺘَُﻬﺎ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﺧ ُﺮو ِج َوْﻗ ِﺖ اﻟﻨﱠ ْﻬ ِﻲ إِﻟَﻰ ﻗُﺒَْﯿ ِﻞ‬‫َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺻَﻼُة اﻟ ﱡﻀ َﺤﻰ ِﻏﺒ‬
.ِ ‫اﻟ ﱠﺰ َوال ِ. َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ﺗَ ِﺤﯿﱠُﺔ اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠِﺪ، َو ُﺳﻨﱠُﺔ اﻟ ُﻮ ُﺿﻮِء، َوإِ ْﺣﯿَﺎُء َﻣﺎ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟِﻌ َﺸﺎﺋَْﯿ ِﻦ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻗِﯿَﺎِم اﻟﻠﱠْﯿﻞ‬ ‫َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺻَﻼُة اﻻِ ْﺳﺘِ َﺨﺎ َرِة َوﻟَْﻮ ﻓِﻲ َﺧْﯿ ٍﺮ، َوﯾُﺒَﺎَد ُر ﺑِِﻪ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪَه ا . َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺻَﻼُة اﻟ َﺤﺎ َﺟِﺔ إِﻟَﻰ ا ﱠﷲِ ﺗََﻌﺎﻟَﻰ أَْو إِﻟَﻰ‬ ‫آَدِﻣ ّﻲ ٍ. َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺻَﻼُة اﻟﺘﱠ ْﻮﺑَﺔ ِ. َوﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ُﺳ ُﺠﻮُد ﺗَِﻼ َوٍة َﻣ َﻊ ﻗَ ْﺼ ِﺮ ﻓَ ْﺼ ٍﻞ ﻟِﻘَﺎ ِر ٍئ َوُﻣ ْﺴﺘَِﻤﻊ ٍ. َوﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ُﺳ ُﺠﻮُد‬
.ٍ ‫ُﺷ ْﻜ ٍﺮ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ﺗَ َﺠﱡﺪِد ﻧِ ْﻌَﻤٍﺔ أَو اْﻧِﺪﻓَﺎ ِع ﻧِْﻘَﻤﺔ‬
Prohibited Times There are five prohibited times which are: from the start of the second fajr until the sun rises; from ʿaṣr until the sun sets; from its rising until it has risen a spear’s height; at its zenith until it falls; and at its setting until it completes. In these times, it is absolutely prohibited to begin a voluntary prayer apart from the following: an obligatory make-up prayer; two

rakʿahs for ṭawāf [35] ; the recommended prayer of fajr (performed on time); or a funeral prayer after fajr or ʿaṣr.
،‫َوأَْوﻗَﺎ ُت اﻟﻨﱠ ْﻬ ِﻲ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴﺔ ٌ: ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻃﻠُﻮ ِع ﻓَ ْﺠ ٍﺮ ﺛَﺎ ٍن إِﻟَﻰ ُﻃﻠُﻮ ِع اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﻤ ِﺲ، َوِﻣ ْﻦ َﺻَﻼِة اﻟَﻌ ْﺼ ِﺮ إِﻟَﻰ اﻟُﻐ ُﺮو ِب‬ ‫َو ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ُﻃﻠُﻮ ِﻋَﻬﺎ إِﻟَﻰ ا ْرﺗِﻔَﺎ ِﻋَﻬﺎ ﻗَْﺪ َر ُر ْﻣ ٍﺢ، َو ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ﻗِﯿَﺎِﻣَﻬﺎ َﺣﺘﱠﻰ ﺗَ ُﺰو َل، َو ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ُﻏ ُﺮوﺑَِﻬﺎ َﺣﺘَﻰ ﯾَﺘِﱠﻢ، ﻓَﯿَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم‬ ‫ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ اْﺑﺘَِﺪاُء ﻧَْﻔ ٍﻞ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎً، َﻻ ﻗَ َﻀﺎُء ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍض، َوﻓِ ْﻌ ُﻞ َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﻲ َﻃ َﻮا ٍف، َو ُﺳﻨﱠُﺔ ﻓَ ْﺠ ٍﺮ أََداًء، َو َﺟﻨَﺎ َزٌة ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﻓَ ْﺠ ٍﺮ‬
.ٍ ‫َو َﻋ ْﺼﺮ‬
Congregational Prayer Congregational prayer, for the five offered prayers, is obligatory upon capable free men—even while traveling. It is not a prerequisite and thus valid from an individual, whose reward will not diminish with an excuse. It is convened with two (even with a woman or bondservant, but not a young child for an obligatory prayer), apart from Friday and ‘Eid prayers. It is impermissible to lead prayer in a masjid that has an appointed Imām. It is invalid except with his permission, the absence of his disdain, or his tardiness as the time wanes. Whoever makes takbīr before the Imām’s first taslīm has joined the congregation and whoever catches the bowing has caught the rakʿah. It is recommended to join the Imām, however found. Whatever is caught with him is its end, and what is made up is its beginning. The following are shouldered by the Imām for the follower: reciting; the prostration of forgetfulness and recitation; having a sutrah; the supplication of qunūt; and the first tashahhud, if preceded by one rakʿah. It is preferred to begin its actions after the Imām, coinciding with him in them or the salām is disliked. It is impermissible to precede him. Making takbīr al-iḥrām, while coinciding with him, or before he concludes, does not count. Intentionally, without excuse, or forgetfully making salām before him, without repeating it after him, is invalid.
It is preferred for the Imām to lighten it, while maintaining completion; to make the recitation in the first longer than the second; and to wait for anyone coming in, so long as it does not harm the follower(s).
ٌَ

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،ً‫َﺻَﻼُة اﻟ َﺠَﻤﺎ َﻋِﺔ َوا ِﺟﺒٌَﺔ ﻟِﻠ َﺨ ْﻤ ِﺲ اﻟُﻤ َﺆﱠداِة َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ ﱢﺮ َﺟﺎ ِل اﻷَ ْﺣ َﺮا ِر اﻟﻘَﺎِد ِرﯾ َﻦ َوﻟَْﻮ َﺳﻔَﺮاً، َوﻟَْﯿ َﺴ ْﺖ َﺷ ْﺮﻃﺎ‬
.ٍ ‫ﻓَﺘَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻣْﻨﻔَ ِﺮٍد َوَﻻ ﯾَْﻨﻘُ ُﺺ أَ ْﺟ ُﺮُه َﻣ َﻊ ُﻋْﺬر‬ ‫َوﺗَْﻨَﻌﻘُِﺪ ﺑِﺎْﺛﻨَﯿ َﻦ ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ُﺟُﻤَﻌٍﺔ َو ِﻋﯿٍﺪ، َوﻟَْﻮ ﺑِﺄُْﻧﺜَﻰ أَْو َﻋْﺒٍﺪ َﻻ ﺑِ َﺼﺒِ ﱟﻲ ﻓِﻲ ﻓَ ْﺮض ٍ. َو َﺣ ُﺮَم أَ ْن ﯾَ ُﺆﱠم ﺑَِﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ‬
.ِ ‫ﻟَُﻪ إَِﻣﺎٌم َراﺗِ ٌﺐ، ﻓََﻼ ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ إِﱠﻻ َﻣ َﻊ إِْذﻧِِﻪ و َﻋَﺪِم َﻛ َﺮا َﻫﺘِِﻪ، أَْو ﺗَﺄَ ﱡﺧ ِﺮِه َو ِﺿْﯿ ِﻖ اﻟ َﻮْﻗﺖ‬ .َ ‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ َﻛﺒﱠ َﺮ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ ﺗَ ْﺴﻠِﯿَﻤِﺔ اِﻹَﻣﺎِم اﻷُوﻟَﻰ أَْد َر َك اﻟ َﺠَﻤﺎ َﻋِﺔ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ أَْد َر َك اﻟ ﱡﺮُﻛﻮ َع أَْد َر َك اﻟ ﱠﺮ ْﻛَﻌﺔ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ُد ُﺧﻮﻟُُﻪ َﻣ َﻊ إَِﻣﺎِﻣِﻪ َﻛْﯿ َﻒ أَْد َرَﻛُﻪ، َوَﻣﺎ أَْد َر َك َﻣَﻌُﻪ آ ِﺧ ُﺮ َﻫﺎ، َوَﻣﺎ ﯾَْﻘ ِﻀﯿِﻪ أَﱠوﻟَُﻬﺎ، وﯾَﺘَ َﺤﱠﻤ ُﻞ َﻋ ْﻦ َﻣﺄَُﻣﻮٍم‬
.ٍ ‫ﻗِ َﺮاَءًة، َو ُﺳ ُﺠﻮَد َﺳ ْﻬ ٍﻮ َوﺗَِﻼ َوٍة، َو ُﺳْﺘ َﺮًة َوُد َﻋﺎَء ﻗُﻨُﻮ ٍت، َوﺗَ َﺸﱡﻬﺪاً أَﱠوﻻً إَِذا ُﺳﺒِ َﻖ ﺑِ َﺮ ْﻛَﻌﺔ‬ ‫َواﻷَ ْوﻟَﻰ أَ ْن ﯾَ ْﺸ َﺮ َع ﻓِﻲ أَْﻓَﻌﺎﻟَِﻬﺎ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ إَِﻣﺎٍم، ﻓَﺈِ ْن َواﻓَﻘَُﻪ ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ َوﻓِﻲ َﺳﻼٍم ُﻛ ِﺮَه، َوإِ ْن َﺳﺒَﻘَُﻪ َﺣ ُﺮَم، َوإِ ْن َﻛﺒﱠ َﺮ‬
. ْ ‫ِﻹ ْﺣ َﺮاٍم َﻣَﻌُﻪ أَْو ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ إِْﺗَﻤﺎِﻣِﻪ ﻟَﻢ ﺗَْﻨَﻌﻘِْﺪ، َوإِ ْن َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ ﻗَْﺒﻠَُﻪ َﻋ ْﻤﺪاً ﺑَِﻼ ُﻋْﺬ ٍر أَْو َﺳ ْﻬﻮاً َوﻟَﻢ ﯾُِﻌْﺪُه ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪَه ﺑَ َﻄﻠَﺖ‬ ‫و ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ِﻹَﻣﺎٍم اﻟﺘﱠ ْﺨﻔِﯿ ُﻒ َﻣ َﻊ اِﻹْﺗَﻤﺎِم، َوﺗَ ْﻄ ِﻮﯾ ُﻞ ﻗِ َﺮاَءِة اﻷُوﻟَﻰ َﻋ ْﻦ اﻟﺜﱠﺎﻧِﯿَِﺔ، َواْﻧﺘِ َﻈﺎ ُر َدا ِﺧ ٍﻞ إِ ْن ﻟَﻢ ﯾَ ُﺸ ﱠﻖ َﻋﻠَﻰ‬
.ٍ ‫َﻣﺄُﻣﻮم‬
Imāmship The most entitled to lead the prayer is the best reciter and most knowledgeable. The reciter who does not know the rulings of prayer precedes the illiterate jurist, followed (in subsequent order) by the eldest, the noblest, and the most pious and scrupulous; lots are then drawn.
The home resident and Imām of the masjid (even if a bondservant) are more deserving, except for someone who wields authority over them. A free man is preferred over the fully and partially subjugated, and the partially subjugated is preferred over the fully subjugated. The resident, the seeing, the townsman, anyone with wuḍūʾ, the lender, and the renter are all preferred over their opposites. Leadership of a sinner is categorically invalid, except for jumuʿah and ʿEid if unable to pray behind another.
It is valid behind the blind, deaf, uncircumcised, a man with severed hands, feet, or nose, and someone who often solecises without changing the meaning. It is not valid behind a mute or disbeliever. There is no leadership for someone unable to meet a prerequisite or pillar (except with those like him), apart from the appointed Imām of a masjid, whose deficiency will likely end. He is to pray seated and those behind him are to sit; it is valid to stand.

Neither a woman nor a hermaphrodite can lead men or hermaphrodites, nor can the discerning lead the mature in an obligatory prayer. There is no imāmship for the following: the deliberately impure or contaminated with najāsah (it is however valid for the follower if both he and the follower were ignorant until its completion); or an illiterate (i.e. someone that cannot properly read al-Fātiḥah, who renders a diphthong what is not to be rendered as such, or who solecises in a way which changes the meaning and is incapable of correcting himself), except for those with a similar condition(s).
To stand in front of the congregation is recommended. Even for iḥrām, the prayer is invalid if performed in front of him (based on the back of the foot). An individual or hermaphrodite is obliged to stand on his right, which is permitted for a woman, though preferred that she stands behind him. The prayer is not valid on his left while his right is vacant or if performed alone [36] for the duration of at least one rakʿah.
If both are in the masjid, following is categorically valid if the Imām’s movements are known. If they are not gathered inside, it is stipulated that the Imām, or those behind him, are seen, even if just during a part of it.
It is disliked for the Imām to be elevated a cubit or more above the follower, but not vice versa. Attending a masjid or congregation after eating onion, radish, etc. is disliked until the odor subsides.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫اﻷَوﻟَﻰ ﺑِﺎِﻹَﻣﺎَﻣِﺔ اﻷَ ْﺟ َﻮُد ﻗِ َﺮاَءًة اﻷَْﻓﻘَُﻪ، َوﯾُﻘَﱠﺪُم ﻗَﺎ ِر ٌئ َﻻ ﯾَ ْﻌﻠَُﻢ ﻓِْﻘَﻪ َﺻَﻼﺗِِﻪ َﻋﻠَﻰ ﻓَﻘِﯿٍﻪ أُﱢﻣ ﱟﻲ، ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻷَ َﺳ ﱡﻦ، ﺛُﱠﻢ‬
،‫اﻷَ ْﺷ َﺮ ُف، ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻷَْﺗﻘَﻰ َواﻷَ ْو َر ُع، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُْﻘ َﺮ ُع‬ ‫َو َﺻﺎ ِﺣ ُﺐ اﻟﺒَْﯿ ِﺖ َوإَِﻣﺎُم اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠِﺪ َوﻟَﻮ َﻋْﺒﺪاً أَ َﺣ ﱡﻖ إﱠﻻ ِﻣ ْﻦ ِذي ُﺳﻠْ َﻄﺎ ٍن ﻓِﯿِﻬَﻤﺎ، َو ُﺣ ﱞﺮ أَوﻟَﻰ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻋْﺒٍﺪ‬ ،‫َوُﻣﺒَﱠﻌ ٍﺾ، َوُﻣﺒَﱠﻌ ٌﺾ أَوﻟَﻰ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻋْﺒٍﺪ، َو َﺣﺎ ِﺿ ٌﺮ، َوﺑَ ِﺼﯿ ٌﺮ، َو َﺣ َﻀ ِﺮ ﱞي، َوُﻣﺘَ َﻮ ﱢﺿ ٌﺊ، َوُﻣِﻌﯿ ٌﺮ، َوُﻣ ْﺴﺘَـْﺄ ِﺟ ٌﺮ‬
. ‫أَوﻟَﻰ ِﻣ ْﻦ ِﺿﱢﺪِه م‬ .ِ ‫َوَﻻ ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ إَِﻣﺎَﻣُﺔ ﻓَﺎ ِﺳ ٍﻖ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎً إِﱠﻻ ﻓِﻲ ُﺟُﻤَﻌٍﺔ َو ِﻋْﯿٍﺪ ﺗََﻌﱡﺬراً َﺧﻠْ َﻒ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮه‬ ‫َوﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ َﺧﻠْ َﻒ أَ ْﻋَﻤﻰ أَ َﺻﱠﻢ، َوأَْﻗﻠَ َﻒ، وأَْﻗ َﻄ َﻊ ﯾََﺪْﯾ ِﻦ، أَْو ِر ْﺟﻠَﯿ ِﻦ أَْو أَْﻧ ٍﻒ، َوَﻛﺜِْﯿ ِﺮ ﻟَ ْﺤ ٍﻦ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾُ ِﺤ ْﻞ اﻟَﻤ ْﻌﻨَﻰ، َﻻ‬ ‫َﺧﻠْ َﻒ أَ ْﺧ َﺮ َس َوَﻛﺎﻓِ ٍﺮ، َوَﻻ إَِﻣﺎَﻣُﺔ َﻋﺎ ِﺟ ٍﺰ َﻋ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﺮ ٍط أَْو ُر ْﻛ ٍﻦ إِﱠﻻ ﺑِِﻤْﺜﻠِِﻪ إِﱠﻻ اِﻹَﻣﺎَم اﻟ ﱠﺮاﺗِ َﺐ ﺑَِﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ اﻟَﻤ ْﺮ ُﺟ ﱠﻮ‬
.ً ‫َز َوا ُل ِﻋﻠﱠﺘِِﻪ ﻓَﯿُ َﺼﻠِﻲ َﺟﺎﻟِﺴﺎً، َوﯾَ ْﺠﻠِ ُﺴﻮ َن َﺧﻠْﻔَُﻪ، َوﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ ﻗِﯿَﺎﻣﺎ‬ ‫َوَﻻ إَِﻣﺎَﻣُﺔ ا ْﻣ َﺮأٍَة َو ُﺧْﻨﺜَﻰ ﻟِِﺮ َﺟﺎ ٍل أَْو َﺧﻨَﺎﺛَﻰ، َوَﻻ ُﻣَﻤﯿﱠ ٍﺰ ﻟِﺒَﺎﻟٍِﻎ ﻓِﻲ ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍض، َوَﻻ إَِﻣﺎَﻣُﺔ ُﻣ ْﺤِﺪ ٍث أَْو ﻧَ ِﺠ ٍﺲ ﯾَ ْﻌﻠَُﻢ‬ ‫َذﻟِ َﻚ؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن َﺟِﻬ َﻞ ُﻫ َﻮ َوَﻣْﺄُﻣﻮٌم َﺣﺘﱠﻰ اَْﻧﻘَ َﻀ ْﺖ، َﺻ ﱠﺤ ْﺖ ﻟِِﻤﺄَُﻣﻮٍم، َوَﻻ إَِﻣﺎَﻣُﺔ أُﱢﻣ ّﻲ ٍ— َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻣ ْﻦ َﻻ ﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺴ ُﻦ‬

ْ‫َ ﱠ‬

ً

ُ ًَ ْ َ

َ

ََ َ

.ِ ‫اﻟﻔَﺎﺗِ َﺤﺔ أ ْو ﯾُْﺪ ِﻏُﻢ ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ َﻣﺎ َﻻ ﯾُْﺪ َﻏُﻢ، أ ْو ﯾَﻠ َﺤ ُﻦ ﻟ ْﺤﻨﺎً ﯾُ ِﺤﯿﻞ اﻟَﻤ ْﻌﻨَﻰ َﻋ ْﺠﺰاً َﻋ ْﻦ إِ ْﺻَﻼ ِﺣِﻪ إِﱠﻻ ﺑِِﻤْﺜﻠِﻪ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ُوﻗُﻮ ُف َﺟَﻤﺎ َﻋٍﺔ ُﻣﺘَﻘَﱢﺪﻣﺎً َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻬْﻢ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﺗَﻘَﱠﺪَﻣُﻪ َﻣْﺄُﻣﻮٌم َوﻟَﻮ ﺑِﺈِ ْﺣ َﺮاٍم ﻟَْﻢ ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱠﺢ َﺻَﻼﺗُُﻪ، َواﻻ ْﻋﺘِﺒَﺎ ُر‬ ‫ﺑُِﻤ َﺆ ﱠﺧ ِﺮ ﻗََﺪٍم، َوﯾَﻘِ ُﻒ اﻟ َﻮا ِﺣُﺪ أَْو اﻟ ُﺨْﻨﺜَﻰ َﻋ ْﻦ ﯾَِﻤﯿﻨِِﻪ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑﺎً، َواﻟَﻤ ْﺮأَُة َﺧﻠْﻔَُﻪ ﻧَْﺪﺑﺎً، َوﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز َﻋ ْﻦ ﯾَِﻤﯿﻨِِﻪ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ‬
،‫َﺻﻠﱠﻰ َﻋ ْﻦ ﯾَ َﺴﺎ ِرِه َﻣ َﻊ ُﺧﻠْ ِﻮ ﯾَِﻤﯿﻨِِﻪ، أَْو َر ْﻛَﻌًﺔ ُﻣْﻨﻔَ ِﺮداً ﻟَﻢ ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱠﺢ َﺻَﻼﺗُُﻪ‬ ‫َوإَِذا َﺟَﻤَﻌُﻬَﻤﺎ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠٌﺪ َﺻ ﱠﺤ ْﺖ اﻟﻘُْﺪ َوُة ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎً ﺑِ َﺸ ْﺮ ِط اﻟِﻌﻠْـِﻢ ﺑِﺎْﻧﺘِﻘَﺎَﻻ ِت اِﻹَﻣﺎِم، َوإِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺠَﻤ ْﻌُﻬَﻤﺎ ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ُر ْؤﯾَُﺔ‬
. ‫اِﻹَﻣﺎِم أَْو َﻣ ْﻦ َو َراَءُه َوﻟَْﻮ ﻓِﻲ ﺑَ ْﻌ ِﻀَﻪ ا‬ .ُ ‫َوُﻛ ِﺮَه ُﻋﻠُﱡﻮ إَِﻣﺎٍم َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻣﺄَُﻣﻮٍم ِذ َراﻋﺎً ﻓﺄَ ْﻛﺜَ َﺮ َﻻ َﻋ ْﻜ ُﺴﻪ‬ .ُ ‫َوُﻛ ِﺮَه ُﺣ ُﻀﻮ ُر َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ َو َﺟَﻤﺎ َﻋٍﺔ ﻟَِﻤ ْﻦ أََﻛ َﻞ ﺑَ َﺼ ًﻼ أَْو ﻓِ ْﺠ ًﻼ َوﻧَ ْﺤ َﻮُه َﺣﺘﱠﻰ ﯾَْﺬ َﻫ َﺐ ِرْﯾ ُﺤﻪ‬
Excused from Congregation The following cases are excused from attending Friday and congregational prayers: when sick or fearful of sickness (while not in the masjid; when holding back either urine or stool; when food is presented while hungry (it is allowed to eat until satiated); when looking for someone lost; whoever fears the loss or destruction of their property or earnings; fears the death of a relative or close friend; fears harm from the authorities, rain, etc.; from the persistence of a debtor while insolvent; or loss of a travel group, etc.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﯾُ ْﻌَﺬ ُر ﺑِﺘَ ْﺮ ِك ُﺟُﻤَﻌٍﺔ َو َﺟَﻤﺎ َﻋٍﺔ َﻣ ِﺮﯾ ٌﺾ، َو َﺧﺎﺋِ ٌﻒ ُﺣُﺪو َث َﻣ َﺮ ٍض ﻟَْﯿ َﺴﺎ ﺑِﺎﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠِﺪ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﯾَُﺪاﻓِ ُﻊ أَ َﺣَﺪ‬ ‫اﻷَ ْﺧﺒَﺜَﯿ ِﻦ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﺑِ َﺤ ْﻀ َﺮِة َﻃَﻌﺎٍم ﯾَ ْﺤﺘَﺎ ُج إِﻟْﯿِﻪ، َوﻟَُﻪ اﻟ ﱠﺸْﺒ ُﻊ، أَْو ﻟَُﻪ َﺿﺎﺋِــ ٌﻊ ﯾِ ْﺮ ُﺟﻮُه، أَْو ﯾَ َﺨﺎ ُف ِﺿﯿَﺎ َع َﻣﺎﻟِِﻪ‬ ‫أَْو َﺿ َﺮراً ﻓِﯿِﻪ أَْو ﻓِﻲ َﻣِﻌﯿ َﺸٍﺔ ﯾِ ْﺤﺘَﺎ ُﺟَﻬﺎ، أَْو َﻣﻮ َت ﻗَ ِﺮﯾﺒِِﻪ أَْو َرﻓِﯿﻘِِﻪ، أَْو َﺿ َﺮراً ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﺳﻠْ َﻄﺎ ٍن أَْو َﻣ ْﻄ ٍﺮ‬
.َ ‫َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه، أَْو ُﻣ َﻼ َزَﻣَﺔ َﻏ ِﺮْﯾٍﻢ ﻟَُﻪ َوَﻻ َﺷ ْﻲَء َﻣَﻌُﻪ، أَْو ﻓَ ْﻮ َت ُرْﻓﻘٍَﺔ َوﻧَ ْﺤ َﻮ َذﻟِﻚ‬
Prayer of the Ill It is required that the ill pray while standing (even in the bowing posture), while leaning or resting upon someone employed (if capable of payment). If they are unable to do that, however, sitting is permitted and sitting cross-legged is preferred. If they are unable to do that, then on their side, the right of which is better. If they are unable to do that, they gesture to prostrate and bow to the best of their ability, making the prostration lower. If they are unable to do that, they signal with their eyes while the action is

present in their heart; the same applies to the statements of someone unable to speak.
So long as a sound mind is present, prayer is not waived. If standing or sitting becomes possible during the prayer, they must be done and the prayer then completed. If standing is possible, an obligatory prayer performed on a vessel while seated is not valid. It is valid on a standing or advancing mount for the following reasons: being harmed by mud, rain, etc.; fear of being separated from a travel party; fear for one’s life from an enemy; or being unable to mount after dismounting. It is a must to face toward the qiblah and do what is possible. The resting place of the limbs is considered during prostration, so unnecessarily putting the forehead on fluffy cotton or praying on a swing invalidates it.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﯾَﻠْ َﺰُم اﻟَﻤ ِﺮْﯾ َﺾ أَ ْن ﯾُ َﺼﻠﱢ َﻲ ﻗَﺎﺋِﻤﺎً، َوﻟَﻮ َﻛ َﺮاِﻛ ٍﻊ ُﻣ ْﻌﺘَِﻤﺪاً أَْو ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَﻨِﺪاً ﺑِﺄُ ْﺟ َﺮٍة ﯾَْﻘِﺪ ُر َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺴﺘَ ِﻄ ْﻊ‬ ‫ﻓَﻘَﺎ ِﻋﺪاً ُﻣﺘَ َﺮﺑﱢًﻌﺎ ﻧَْﺪﺑﺎً، َوَﻛْﯿ َﻒ ﻗََﻌَﺪ َﺟﺎ َز، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺴﺘَ ِﻄ ْﻊ ﻓََﻌﻠَﻰ َﺟْﻨﺒِِﻪ، َواﻷَْﯾَﻤ ُﻦ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ، َوﯾُﻮِﻣ ُﺊ ﺑِ ُﺮُﻛﻮ ٍع‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ُﺠﻮٍد َﻋﺎ ِﺟ ٌﺰ َﻋْﻨُﻬَﻤﺎ َﻣﺎ أَْﻣَﻜﻨَُﻪ، َوﯾَ ْﺠَﻌ ُﻞ اﻟ ﱡﺴ ُﺠﻮَد أَ ْﺧﻔَ َﺾ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن َﻋ َﺠ َﺰ أَْوَﻣﺄَ ﺑِ َﻄ ْﺮﻓِِﻪ ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَ ْﺤ ِﻀﺮاً اﻟﻔَ ْﻌ َﻞ‬
.ِ ‫ﺑِﻘَﻠْﺒِِﻪ، َوَﻛَﺬا اﻟﻘَ ْﻮ ُل إِ ْن َﻋ َﺠ َﺰ َﻋْﻨُﻪ ﺑِﻠِ َﺴﺎﻧِﻪ‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﺗَ ْﺴﻘُ ُﻂ َﻣﺎ َداَم اﻟَﻌْﻘ ُﻞ ﺛَﺎﺑِﺘﺎً، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻗََﺪ َر َﻋﻠَﻰ ﻗِﯿَﺎٍم أَْو ﻗُُﻌﻮٍد ﻓِﻲ أَْﺛﻨَﺎﺋَِﻬﺎ اْﻧﺘَﻘَ َﻞ إِﻟَْﯿِﻪ َوأَﺗَﱠﻤَﻪ ا . َوَﻻ ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ‬ ‫َﻣ ْﻜﺘُﻮﺑٌَﺔ ﻓِﻲ َﺳﻔِﯿﻨٍَﺔ ﻗَﺎ ِﻋﺪاً ﻟِﻘَﺎِد ٍر َﻋﻠَﻰ ﻗِﯿَﺎٍم، ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ َﻋﻠَﻰ َرا ِﺣﻠٍَﺔ َواﻗِﻔٍَﺔ أَْو َﺳﺎﺋِ َﺮٍة ﻟِﺘَـﺄَﱟذ ﺑِ َﻮ ْﺣ ٍﻞ َوَﻣ َﻄ ٍﺮ‬ ‫َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه، أَْو ﻟِ َﺨـ ْﻮ ِف اْﻧﻘِ َﻄﺎ ٍع َﻋ ْﻦ ُرْﻓﻘٍَﺔ، أَْو َﺧ ْﻮ ٍف َﻋﻠَﻰ ﻧَْﻔ ِﺴِﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮ َﻋُﺪ ﱟو، أَْو َﻋ ْﺠ ِﺰِه َﻋ ْﻦ ُرُﻛﻮ ٍب إِ ْن‬ ‫ﻧَ َﺰ َل، َو َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ اﻻ ْﺳﺘِْﻘﺒَﺎ ُل َوَﻣﺎ ﯾْﻘِﺪ ُر َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ، َوﯾُ ْﻌﺘَﺒَ ُﺮ اﻟَﻤﻘَ ﱡﺮ ِﻷَ ْﻋ َﻀﺎِء اﻟ ﱡﺴ ُﺠﻮِد، ﻓَﻠَﻮ َو َﺿ َﻊ َﺟْﺒَﻬﺘَُﻪ َﻋﻠَﻰ ﻗُ ْﻄ ٍﻦ‬
.َ ‫َﻣْﻨﻔُﻮ ٍش أَْو َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ﻓِﻲ أُ ْر ُﺟﻮ َﺣٍﺔ َوَﻻ َﺿ ُﺮو َرَة ﻟَْﻢ ﺗَ ِﺼ ّﺢ‬
Shortening Prayer It is recommended to shorten a four-rakʿah prayer for anyone who intends permissible travel (including tourism and sightseeing) to a specific destination which reaches 16 farsakhs [37] (i.e. two days underway by land or sea), if they surpass the homes of their village or tents of their people. Though shortening is better, completion is not disliked. Repeating is not required of anyone who returns before reaching the distance. Whoever intends unlimited residence in a place, residence for more than four days, or follows a resident, is to complete it. Perpetually shortening is legislated due to being withheld wrongfully, due to rain, or staying to handle a need

(without the intention to reside for more than four days),—while not knowing when it will end.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ُﯾ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﻗ ْﺼ ُﺮ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼِة اﻟ ﱡﺮَﺑﺎ ِﻋﱠﯿ ِﺔ ﻟِ َﻤﻦ َﻧ َﻮى َﺳَﻔﺮاً ُﻣَﺒﺎﺣﺎً، َوﻟَ ْﻮ ﻟُِﻨ ْﺰ َﻫ ٍﺔ أَ ْو ُﻓ ْﺮ َﺟ ٍﺔ ﻟِ َﻤ َﺤ ﱟﻞ ُﻣ َﻌﱠﯿ ٍﻦ‬ ‫ﺮا َوَﺑ ْﺤﺮاً، َو ِﻫ َﻲ َﯾ ْﻮ َﻣﺎ ِن َﻗﺎ ِﺻَﺪا ِن إَِذا َﻓﺎ َر َق ُﺑُﯿﻮ َت َﻗ ْﺮَﯾِﺘ ِﻪ اﻟ َﻌﺎ ِﻣ َﺮِة‬ ‫َﯾْﺒﻠُ ُﻎ ِﺳﱠﺘ َﺔ َﻋ َﺸ َﺮ َﻓ ْﺮ َﺳﺨﺎً َﺑ‬
.ِ ‫أَ ْو ِﺧَﯿﺎَم َﻗ ْﻮ ِﻣﻪ‬ . ِ ‫َوَﻻ ُﯾ ْﻜ َﺮُه إِْﺗ َﻤﺎٌم، َواﻟَﻘ ْﺼ ُﺮ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ، َوَﻻ ُﯾ ِﻌﯿُﺪ َﻣ ْﻦ َﻗ َﺼ َﺮ ُﺛﱠﻢ َر َﺟ َﻊ َﻗْﺒ َﻞ ا ْﺳِﺘ ْﻜ َﻤﺎ ِل اﻟ ُﻤ َﺴﺎَﻓﺔ‬ ‫َو َﻣ ْﻦ َﻧ َﻮى إَِﻗﺎ َﻣ ًﺔ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠََﻘ ًﺔ ﺑ َﻤ ْﻮ ِﺿ ٍﻊ، أَ ْو أَ ْﻛَﺜ َﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ أَ ْرَﺑ َﻌ ِﺔ أَﱠﯾﺎٍم، أَ ْو اْﺋَﺘﱠﻢ ِﺑ ُﻤِﻘﯿٍﻢ، أََﺗﱠﻢ، َوإِ ْن ُﺣِﺒ َﺲ‬ ،‫ُﻇْﻠﻤﺎً أَ ْو ِﺑ َﻤ َﻄ ٍﺮ أَ ْو أََﻗﺎَم ﻟِ َﺤﺎ َﺟ ٍﺔ ِﺑَﻼ ِﻧﱠﯿ ِﺔ إَِﻗﺎ َﻣ ٍﺔ َﻓ ْﻮ َق أَ ْرَﺑ َﻌ ِﺔ أَﱠﯾﺎٍم، َوَﻻ َﯾ ْﺪ ِري َﻣَﺘﻰ َﺗْﻨَﻘ ِﻀﻲ‬
.ً ‫َﻗ َﺼ َﺮ أََﺑﺪا‬
Combining Prayer It is permitted to combine ẓuhr with ʿaṣr and maghrib with ʿishāʾ in either of their times [38] . It is preferred to avoid it, except for the gatherings of ʿArafah and Muzdalifah, which is then recommended.
Combining can be done in the following eight cases: traveling the distance in which shortening is allowed; the ill who face difficulty if not combined; a wet-nurse due to difficulty from abundant filth; pseudo-menstruation etc.; anyone incapable of purifying themselves or making tayammum for every prayer; not knowing the time, e.g. the blind etc.; or due to some excuse or work which permits abandoning Friday and congregational prayers. Combining between maghrib and ʿishāʾ is specifically permitted (even if prayed at home) due to snow, cold, ice, mud, strong cold wind, and rain which soaks the clothes, coupled with difficulty.
Regarding advancing or delaying, the best is that which is easiest. If they are equal, then delaying is preferred.
Sequence is an absolute prerequisite for combining. The following are prerequisites for combining during the time of the first prayer: the intention to combine before the iḥrām of the first; not separating the second (except with the equivalent of the iqāmah or a light wuḍūʿ), which would thus be invalided by an emphasized routine prayer between them;

the presence of an excuse at the beginning of both and the first salām; its continuity (except when combining for rain etc.) until the completion of the second. Therefore, it is not invalidated if someone makes iḥrām for the first because of rain, which ceases and does not continue though it produces mud. If it does not [39] , it is.
Additionally, if travel concludes with the first prayer, the combining and shortening are invalidated. It is, however, to be completed and is valid as an obligatory prayer. If travel is concluded during the second, they [40] are invalid, but it is to be completed as a voluntary prayer. The only prerequisites to combine in the second’s time are to have the intention from the first’s time (so long as there is still time to make it) and the presence of the excuse at the time of the second.
It is not a prerequisite of validity to have only one Imām. It is, therefore, valid if the follower prays: both behind two Imāms; behind someone not combining; one alone and the other in congregation; leading one in the first and another in the second; or with someone not combining.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ُﯾَﺒﺎ ُح َﺟ ْﻤ ٌﻊ َﺑْﯿ َﻦ ُﻇ ْﻬ ٍﺮ َو َﻋ ْﺼ ٍﺮ َو ِﻋ َﺸﺎَﺋْﯿ ِﻦ ِﺑ َﻮَﻗ ِﺖ إِ ْﺣَﺪا ُﻫ َﻤﺎ، َوَﺗ ْﺮ ُﻛ ُﻪ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ َﻏْﯿ َﺮ َﺟ ْﻤ َﻌ ْﻲ َﻋ َﺮَﻓ َﺔ‬
.ُ ‫َو ْﻣ ْﺰَدﻟَِﻔ َﺔ َﻓُﯿ َﺴ ّﻦ‬ ‫َوُﯾ ْﺠ َﻤ ُﻊ ِﻓﻲ َﺛ َﻤﺎ ِن َﺣﺎَﻻت ٍ: ِﺑ َﺴَﻔ ِﺮ ﻗ ْﺼ ٍﺮ، َو َﻣ ِﺮْﯾ ٌﺾ َﯾْﻠ َﺤُﻘ ُﻪ ِﺑَﺘﺮ ِﻛ ِﻪ َﻣ َﺸﱠﻘٌﺔ، َو ُﻣ ْﺮ ِﺿ ٌﻊ ﻟِ َﻤ َﺸﱠﻘ ِﺔ‬ ‫َﻛْﺜ َﺮِة َﻧ َﺠﺎ َﺳ ٍﺔ، َو ُﻣ ْﺴَﺘ َﺤﺎ َﺿٌﺔ َوَﻧ ْﺤ ُﻮ َﻫﺎ، َو َﻋﺎ ِﺟ ٌﺰ َﻋ ْﻦ َﻃ َﻬﺎ َرٍة أَ ْو َﺗَﯿـﱡﻤٍﻢ ﻟِ ُﻜ ﱢﻞ َﺻَﻼٍة أَ ْو َﻋ ْﻦ‬
.ٍ ‫َﻣ ْﻌ ِﺮَﻓ ِﺔ َوْﻗ ٍﺖ َﻛﺄَ ْﻋ َﻤﻰ َوَﻧ ْﺤ ِﻮِه، أَ ْو ﻟِ ُﻌ ْﺬ ٍر أَ ْو ُﺷ ْﻐ ٍﻞ ُﯾِﺒْﯿ ُﺢ َﺗ ْﺮ َك ُﺟ ُﻤ َﻌ ٍﺔ َو َﺟ َﻤﺎ َﻋﺔ‬ ٌ‫َوَﯾ ْﺨَﺘ ﱡﺺ ِﺑ َﺠ َﻮا ِز َﺟ ْﻤ ِﻊ اﻟ ِﻌ َﺸﺎَﺋْﯿ ِﻦ، َوﻟَ ْﻮ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ِﺑِﺒْﯿِﺘ ِﻪ، َﺛْﻠ ٌﺞ َوَﺑ ْﺮٌد َو َﺟﻠِْﯿٌﺪ، َو َو ْﺣ ٌﻞ َو ِرْﯾ ٌﺢ َﺷِﺪْﯾَﺪة‬
.ٌ ‫َﺑﺎ ِرَدةٌ، َو َﻣ َﻄ ٌﺮ َﯾُﺒ ﱡﻞ اﻟﱢﺜَﯿﺎ َب، َوُﺗ ْﻮ َﺟُﺪ َﻣ َﻌ ُﻪ َﻣ َﺸﱠﻘﺔ‬ .ُ ‫َوا َﻷْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ِﻓ ْﻌ ُﻞ ا َﻷ ْرَﻓ ِﻖ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺗْﻘِﺪْﯾِﻢ َﺟ ْﻤ ٍﻊ أَ ْو َﺗْﺄ ِﺧْﯿ ِﺮِه؛ َﻓﺈِ ِن ا ْﺳَﺘ َﻮَﯾﺎ َﻓَﺘـْﺄ ِﺧﯿ ٌﺮ أَْﻓ َﻀﻞ‬ ‫َوُﯾ ْﺸَﺘ َﺮ ُط ﻟَ ُﻪ َﺗﺮِﺗْﯿ ٌﺐ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎً، َوﻟِ َﺠ ْﻤ ٍﻊ ِﺑ َﻮْﻗ ِﺖ أُ ْوﻟَﻰ ِﻧَﯿٌﺔ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ إِ ْﺣ َﺮا ِﻣ َﻬﺎ، َوأَ ْن َﻻ ُﯾَﻔ ﱢﺮ َق َﺑْﯿَﻨ ُﻬ َﻤﺎ إِﱠﻻ‬ ‫ِﺑَﻘ ْﺪ ِر إَِﻗﺎ َﻣ ٍﺔ َو ُو ُﺿﻮ ٍء َﺧِﻔْﯿ ٍﻒ، َﻓَﯿْﺒ ُﻄ ُﻞ ِﺑ َﺮاِﺗَﺒ ٍﺔ َﺑْﯿَﻨ ُﻬ َﻤﺎ، َو ُو ُﺟﻮُد اﻟ ُﻌ ْﺬ ِر ِﻋْﻨَﺪ اْﻓِﺘَﺘﺎ ِﺣ ِﻬ َﻤﺎ، َو َﺳَﻼِم‬ ‫ا ُﻷ ْوﻟَﻰ، َوا ْﺳِﺘ ْﻤ َﺮا ُرُه ِﻓﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﺟ ْﻤ ِﻊ َﻣ َﻄ ٍﺮ َوَﻧ ْﺤ ِﻮِه إِﻟَﻰ َﻓ َﺮا ِغ اﻟﱠﺜﺎِﻧَﯿ ِﺔ، َﻓﻠَ ْﻮ أَ ْﺣ َﺮَم ِﺑﺎ ُﻷ ْوﻟَﻰ‬
.َ ‫ﻟِ َﻤ َﻄ ٍﺮ ُﺛﱠﻢ اْﻧَﻘ َﻄ َﻊ َﻓﻠَ ْﻢ َﯾ ُﻌ ْﺪ، َﻓﺈِ ْن َﺣ َﺼ َﻞ َو ْﺣ ٌﻞ ﻟَ ْﻢ َﯾْﺒ ُﻄ ْﻞ َوإِﱠﻻ َﺑ َﻄﻞ‬ ،‫َوإِ ْن اْﻧَﻘ َﻄ َﻊ َﺳَﻔ ٌﺮ ِﺑﺄُ ْوﻟَﻰ َﺑ َﻄ َﻞ اﻟ َﺠ ْﻤ ُﻊ َواﻟَﻘ ْﺼ ُﺮ َﻓَﯿِﺘﱡﻤ َﻬﺎ، َوَﺗ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ َﻓ ْﺮﺿﺎً، َوِﺑَﺜﺎِﻧَﯿ ٍﺔ َﺑ َﻄَﻼ‬ ‫َوَﯾِﺘﱡﻤ َﻬﺎ َﻧْﻔﻼ ً. َوُﯾ ْﺸَﺘ َﺮ ُط ﻟِﺠ ْﻤ ٍﻊ ِﺑ َﻮْﻗ ِﺖ َﺛﺎِﻧَﯿ ٍﺔ ِﻧﱠﯿُﺘ ُﻪ ِﺑ َﻮْﻗ ِﺖ أُ ْوﻟَﻰ َﻣﺎ ﻟَ ْﻢ َﯾ ِﻀ ْﻖ َﻋ ْﻦ ِﻓ ْﻌﻠِ َﻬﺎ، َوَﺑَﻘﺎ ُء‬
.ُ ‫ُﻋ ْﺬ ٍر إِﻟَﻰ ُد ُﺧﻮ ِل َوْﻗ ِﺖ اﻟﱠﺜﺎِﻧَﯿ ِﺔ َﻻ َﻏْﯿﺮ‬

َ َْ َ

َ ْ ‫ْ ََ ﱠ‬

‫ﱢ‬

ُ َْ َ

‫َوَﻻ ُﯾ ْﺸَﺘ َﺮ ُط ﻟِ ِﺼ ﱠﺤ ٍﺔ اﱢﺗ َﺤﺎُد إِ َﻣﺎٍم َو َﻣﺄ ُﻣ ْﻮٍم، َﻓﻠ ْﻮ َﺻﱠﻼ ُﻫ َﻤﺎ َﺧْﻠ َﻒ إِ َﻣﺎ َﻣْﯿ ِﻦ، أ ْو َﺧْﻠ َﻒ َﻣ ْﻦ ﻟ ْﻢ‬ ‫َﯾ ْﺠ َﻤ ْﻊ، أَ ْو إِ ْﺣَﺪا ُﻫ َﻤﺎ ُﻣﻨَﻔ ِﺮداً َوا ُﻷ ْﺧ َﺮى َﺟ َﻤﺎ َﻋ ًﺔ أَ ْو ِﺑ َﻤـْﺄ ُﻣ ْﻮٍم ا ُﻷ ْوﻟَﻰ َوِﺑﺂ َﺧ ٍﺮ اﻟﱠﺜﺎِﻧَﯿ َﺔ، أَ ْو ِﺑ َﻤ ْﻦ‬
.َ ‫ﻟَ ْﻢ َﯾ ْﺠ َﻤ ْﻊ، َﺻ ّﺢ‬
Fear Prayer Ṣalāt al-khawf (which has six modes) is valid during permissible combat, even as a resident, due to fear of an enemy’s attack. If fear becomes severe, prayer is made both on foot and mounted, while facing towards the qiblah or any other direction. Even if possible, it is not required to begin prayer facing towards it. They gesture per their ability. During prayer, it is permitted to strike and move, if needed, which does not invalidate it due to excessive duration. It is recommended to carry something for defense which is not heavy, e.g. a sword or knife. It is also permitted to carry najas without having to repeat the prayer.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ َﺻَﻼُة اﻟ َﺨﻮ ِف ﺑِﻘِﺘَﺎ ٍل ُﻣﺒَﺎ ٍح، َوﻟَْﻮ َﺣ ْﻀﺮاً َﻣ َﻊ َﺧ ْﻮ ِف َﻫ ْﺠِﻢ اﻟَﻌُﺪ ﱢو َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﺳﺘﱠِﺔ أَْو ُﺟٍﻪ، َوإَِذا ا ْﺷﺘَﱠﺪ‬ ‫اﻟ َﺨـ ْﻮ ُف َﺻﻠﱡﻮا ِر َﺟﺎﻻً َو ُر ْﻛﺒَﺎﻧﺎً ﻟِﻠْﻘِْﺒﻠَِﺔ َو َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﻫﺎ َوَﻻ ﯾَﻠْ َﺰُم اْﻓﺘَﺘَﺎ ُﺣَﻬﺎ إِﻟَـْﯿَﻬﺎ َوﻟَْﻮ أَْﻣَﻜ َﻦ ﯾُﻮِﻣﺌُ ْﻮ َن َﻃﺎﻗَﺘَُﻬْﻢ‬
.ِ ‫َوﻟُِﻤ َﺼ ﱟﻞ َﻛ ﱞﺮ َوﻓَ ﱞﺮ ﻟَِﻤ ْﺼﻠَ َﺤٍﺔ َوَﻻ ﺗَْﺒ ُﻄ ُﻞ ﺑِ ُﻄﻮﻟﻪ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻟَُﻪ ﻓِْﯿَﻬﺎ َﺣ ْﻤ ُﻞ َﻣﺎ ﯾَْﺪﻓَ ُﻊ ﺑِِﻪ َﻋ ْﻦ ﻧَْﻔ ِﺴِﻪ َوَﻻ ﯾُْﺜﻘِﻠُُﻪ َﻛ َﺴْﯿ ٍﻒ َو ِﺳﱢﻜْﯿ ٍﻦ، َو َﺟﺎ َز ﻟِ َﺤﺎ َﺟٍﺔ َﺣ ْﻤ ُﻞ ﻧَ َﺠ ٍﺲ، َوَﻻ‬
.ُ ‫ﯾُِﻌْﯿﺪ‬
Friday Prayer Jumuʿah is obligatory upon the following: free resident Muslim males of legal capacity in an area with buildings (even if constructed of cane); travelers not permitted to shorten prayer; and residents living outside the city an explicit distance of one farsakh [41] or less between them and its location (from the minaret). It is not obligatory upon the following: those permitted to shorten; the bondsman; partially subjugated; women; and hermaphrodites. It will suffice for whoever attends [42] , however it is not convened with them and

they, as well as non-residents, are not to be counted as a part of the 40. Likewise, their imāmship for it is not valid.
The following are four prerequisites of its validity, none of which include the ruler’s permission:
1. Time—from the beginning of the time for ʿEid to the end of ẓuhr. It is obligated at the zawāl and is preferred after it.
2. The presence of 40 locals including the Imām.
3. Their attendance, even if among them (but not all) are the mute or deaf. If they decrease in number before its completion, they continue as ẓuhr.
4. To begin with two sermons in exchange for two rakʿahs. Their five prerequisites are: time; intention; occurrence during residency; attendance of 40; and delivery by someone whose imāmship is valid.
They have six pillars which are: praise of Allāh; prayers upon Allāh’s messenger (peace be upon him); recitation of a verse from Allāh’s Book; counsel to have taqwa of Allāh; continuity of both sermons with the prayer; and audible delivery so that the required number hears without hindrance.
It is invalidated with unpermitted speech (even if minute) and, if delivered in a language other than Arabic, is like recitation and thus invalid except due to inability. No such exception is made for recitation. The following are recommended: delivery on the minbar or an elevated location; delivery while standing and leaning on a sword or staff; shortening them both (the second being shorter); raising the voice in both, per ability; and supplication for the Muslims. It is permissible to supplicate for someone specific, such as the ruler. It is not blameworthy to deliver the sermon from a paper.
Speaking is prohibited while the Imām is delivering the sermon and is close enough to be heard; it is permitted when he is quiet between them or begins to supplicate.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ اﻟ ُﺠُﻤَﻌُﺔ َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ ُﻣَﻜﻠﱠ ٍﻒ َذَﻛ ٍﺮ ُﺣ ﱟﺮ ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَﻮ ِﻃ ٍﻦ ﺑِﺒِﻨَﺎٍء َوﻟَْﻮ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻗَ َﺼ ٍﺐ، َو َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻣ َﺴﺎﻓِ ٍﺮ َﻻ ﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ﻟَُﻪ‬
.ُ ‫ﺼﺎ ﻓَ ْﺮ َﺳ ٌﺦ ﻓَﺄَﻗَ ّﻞ‬ َ‫اﻟﻘَ َﺼ ُﺮ، َو َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻣﻘِﯿٍﻢ َﺧﺎ ِر َج اﻟﺒَﻠَِﺪ إَِذا َﻛﺎ َن ﺑَْﯿﻨَُﻪ َوﺑَْﯿ َﻦ َﻣ ْﻮ ِﺿِﻌَﻬﺎ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟَﻤﻨَﺎ َرِة ﻧ‬

َُ َ

َُ َ َ َ

َ َ َ َُ

َ

َ

‫َوَﻻ ﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ َﻋﻠﻰ َﻣ ْﻦ ﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ﻟُﻪ اﻟﻘ ْﺼ ُﺮ َوَﻻ َﻋْﺒٍﺪ َوَﻻ ُﻣﺒَﱠﻌ ٍﺾ َوَﻻ ا ْﻣ َﺮأٍة َوَﻻ ُﺧْﻨﺜَﻰ، وَﻣ ْﻦ َﺣ َﻀ َﺮ َﻫﺎ أ ْﺟ َﺰأْﺗُﻪ،‬ ‫َوﻟَْﻢ ﺗَْﻨَﻌﻘِْﺪ ﺑِِﻪ، ﻓََﻼ ﯾُ ْﺤ َﺴ ُﺐ ُﻫ َﻮ َوَﻻ َﻣ ْﻦ ﻟَْﯿ َﺲ ِﻣ ْﻦ أَْﻫ ِﻞ اﻟﺒَﻠَِﺪ ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻷَ ْرﺑَِﻌﯿ َﻦ، َوَﻻ ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ إَِﻣﺎَﻣﺘُُﻬْﻢ ﻓِﯿَﻪ ا .‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ﻟِ ِﺼ ﱠﺤﺘَِﻬﺎ أَ ْرﺑََﻌُﺔ ُﺷ ُﺮو ٍط - ﻟَْﯿ َﺲ ِﻣْﻨَﻬﺎ إِْذ ُن اِﻹَﻣﺎم ِ:‬ ‫أَ َﺣُﺪَه ا : اﻟ َﻮْﻗ ُﺖ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ِﻣ ْﻦ أَﱠو ِل َوْﻗ ِﺖ اﻟِﻌﯿِﺪ إِﻟَﻰ آ ِﺧ ِﺮ َوْﻗ ِﺖ اﻟ ﱡﻈ ْﻬ ِﺮ، َوﺗَﻠْ َﺰُم ﺑِ َﺰ َوا ٍل َوﺑَ ْﻌَﺪُه أَْﻓ َﻀﻞ ُ.‬ ‫اﻟﺜﱠﺎ ِن ي : ا ْﺳﺘِﯿ َﻄﺎ ُن أَ ْرﺑَِﻌﯿ َﻦ َوﻟَْﻮ ﺑِﺎِﻹَﻣﺎم ِ.‬
‫اﻟﺜﱠﺎﻟِﺚ ُ: ُﺣ ُﻀﻮ ُر ُﻫْﻢ، َوﻟَْﻮ َﻛﺎ َن ﻓِﯿَﻬْﻢ ُﺧ ْﺮ ٌس أَْو ُﺻﱞﻢ َﻻ ُﻛﻠﱡُﻬْﻢ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻧَﻘَ ُﺼﻮا ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ إِْﺗَﻤﺎِﻣَﻬﺎ ا ْﺳﺘَْﺄﻧَﻔُﻮا ُﻇ ْﻬﺮا ً‬ ‫.‬
‫اﻟ ﱠﺮاﺑِﻊ ُ: ﺗَﻘَﱡﺪُم ُﺧ ْﻄﺒَﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ ﺑََﺪ َل َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﺮ ِﻃِﻬَﻤﺎ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴُﺔ أَ ْﺷﯿَﺎء َ:‬ ‫اﻟ َﻮْﻗ ُﺖ، َواﻟﻨﱢﯿﱠُﺔ، َو ُوﻗُﻮ ُﻋُﻬَﻤﺎ َﺣ َﻀﺮاً، َو ُﺣ ُﻀﻮ ُر اﻷَ ْرﺑَِﻌﯿ َﻦ، َوأَ ْن ﯾَُﻜﻮ َن ِﻣﱠﻤ ْﻦ ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ إَِﻣﺎَﻣﺘُُﻪ ﻓِﯿَﻪ ا .‬
‫َوأَ ْرَﻛﺎﻧُُﻬَﻤﺎ ِﺳﺘﱠﺔ ٌ: َﺣ ْﻤُﺪ ا ﱠﷲِ، َواﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼُة َﻋﻠَﻰ َر ُﺳﻮ ِل ا ﱠﷲِ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ، َوﻗِ َﺮاَءُة آﯾٍَﺔ ِﻣ ْﻦ ِﻛﺘَﺎ ِب‬ ‫ا ﱠﷲِ، َواﻟ َﻮ ِﺻﯿﱠُﺔ ﺑِﺘَْﻘ َﻮى ا ﱠﷲِ، َوُﻣ َﻮاَﻻﺗُُﻬَﻤﺎ َﻣ َﻊ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼِة، َواﻟ َﺠ ْﻬ ُﺮ ﺑِ َﺤْﯿ ُﺚ ﯾُ ْﺴِﻤ ُﻊ اﻟَﻌَﺪَد اﻟُﻤ ْﻌﺘَﺒَ َﺮ َﺣْﯿ ُﺚ َﻻ َﻣﺎﻧِﻊ ٌ‬
‫.‬ ‫وﯾُْﺒ ِﻄﻠَُﻬﺎ َﻛَﻼٌم ُﻣ َﺤ ﱠﺮٌم، َوﻟَْﻮ ﯾَ ِﺴﯿﺮاً، َو ِﻫ َﻲ ﺑَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮ اﻟَﻌ َﺮﺑِﯿﱠِﺔ َﻛﻘِ َﺮاَءٍة، ﻓََﻼ ﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ إِﱠﻻ َﻣ َﻊ اﻟَﻌ ْﺠ ِﺰ َﻏْﯿ َﺮ اﻟﻘِ َﺮاَءة ِ.‬ ‫َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﻣْﻨﺒَ ٍﺮ أَْو َﻣ ْﻮ ِﺿ ٍﻊ َﻋﺎ ٍل، َوأَ ْن ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﻄ َﺐ ﻗَﺎﺋِﻤﺎً ُﻣ ْﻌﺘَِﻤﺪاً َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺳْﯿ ٍﻒ أَْو َﻋ َﺼﺎ، َوﻗَ ْﺼ ُﺮ ُﻫَﻤﺎ،‬ ‫َواﻟﺜﱠﺎﻧِﯿَُﺔ أَْﻗ َﺼ ُﺮ، َو َرْﻓ ُﻊ اﻟ ﱠﺼ ْﻮ ِت ﺑِِﻬَﻤﺎ َﺣ َﺴ َﺐ اﻟ ﱠﻄﺎﻗَِﺔ، َواﻟﱡﺪ َﻋﺎُء ﻟِﻠُﻤ ْﺴﻠِِﻤﯿ َﻦ، َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ﻟُِﻤَﻌﯿﱠ ٍﻦ َﻛﺎﻟ ﱡﺴﻠْ َﻄﺎ ِن، َوَﻻ‬
‫ﺑﺄَ َس أَ ْن ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﻄ َﺐ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺻ ِﺤﯿﻔَﺔ ٍ.‬ ‫َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم اﻟَﻜَﻼُم َواِﻹَﻣﺎُم ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﻄ ُﺐ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ ﺑِ َﺤْﯿ ُﺚ ﯾَ ْﺴَﻤُﻌُﻪ، َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح إَِذا َﺳَﻜ َﺖ ﺑَْﯿﻨَُﻬَﻤﺎ أَْو َﺷ َﺮ َع ﻓِﻲ ُد َﻋﺎء ٍ.‬

‫‪Friday Prayer Location‬‬ ‫‪The Friday prayer is two rakʿahs. Performing it, and ʿEid, in more than one‬‬ ‫‪place in the city is impermissible, unless out of necessity (i.e. a lack of‬‬ ‫‪space, remoteness, or fear of tribulation, etc.). If the need ceases, the valid‬‬ ‫‪prayer is the one attended or permitted by the ruler. If the prayers are equal‬‬ ‫‪in their permission or lack thereof, the first to perform iḥrām for the‬‬ ‫.‪prayer is valid. If how it occurred is unknown, they pray it as ẓuhur‬‬
‫‪Reciting sūrat al-Kahf and making abundant supplication and prayers of‬‬ ‫‪peace upon the Prophet (peace be upon him) is recommended during the‬‬ ‫‪day. Whoever enters while the Imām is delivering the sermon should not‬‬ ‫.‪sit until they pray two short rakʿahs‬‬

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َواﻟ ُﺠُﻤَﻌُﺔ َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﺎ ِن، َو َﺣ ُﺮَم إِﻗَﺎَﻣﺘَُﻬﺎ َو ِﻋﯿٍﺪ ﻓِﻲ أَْﻛﺜَ َﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣ ْﻮ ِﺿ ٍﻊ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟﺒَﻠَِﺪ إِﱠﻻ ﻟِ َﺤﺎ َﺟٍﺔ َﻛ ِﻀﯿ ٍﻖ َوﺑُ ْﻌٍﺪ َو َﺧ ْﻮ ِف‬ ‫ﻓِْﺘﻨٍَﺔ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ُﻋِﺪَﻣ ْﺖ اﻟَﺤﺎ َﺟُﺔ ﻓَﺎﻟ ﱠﺼ ِﺤﯿ َﺤُﺔ َﻣﺎ ﺑَﺎ َﺷ َﺮُه اِﻹَﻣﺎُم أَْو أَِذ َن ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ا ْﺳﺘَ َﻮﺗَﺎ ﻓِﻲ إِْذ ٍن أَْو‬
‫َﻋَﺪِﻣِﻪ ﻓَﺎﻟ ﱠﺴﺎﺑِﻘَُﺔ ﺑِﺎِﻹ ْﺣ َﺮاِم ِﻫ َﻲ اﻟ ﱠﺼ ِﺤﯿ َﺤُﺔ، َوإِ ْن َﺟِﻬ َﻞ َﻛْﯿ َﻒ َوﻗََﻌﺘَﺎ َﺻﻠﱡﻮا ُﻇ ْﻬﺮا ً.‬

‫ﱠ ﱠُ َ ﱠ‬

‫ََ‬

‫َْ ُ‬

‫َ‬

‫ُ‬

‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻗِ َﺮاَءُة ُﺳﻮ َرِة اﻟَﻜ ْﻬ ِﻒ ﻓِﻲ ﯾَ ْﻮِﻣَﻬﺎ، َوَﻛْﺜ َﺮُة ُد َﻋﺎٍء َو َﺻَﻼٍة َﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ﱢﻲ َﺻﻠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠَﻢ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ‬ .ِ ‫َد َﺧ َﻞ َواِﻹَﻣﺎُم ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﻄ ُﺐ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺠﻠِ ْﺲ َﺣﺘﱠﻰ ﯾَ ْﺮَﻛ َﻊ َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ َﺧﻔِﯿﻔَﺘَْﯿﻦ‬
‘Eid Prayers The ‘Eid prayers are communal obligations. Their times are like that of ṣalāt al-ḍuḥā. Their prerequisites are like jumuʿah, except for the two sermons. If ʿEid goes unknown until after the zawāl, it is to be made up the following day. It is recommended to pray it in a nearby, per custom, barren area.
It is recommended: for the follower to go walking early, after fajr prayer, in their best dress; for the Imām to delay his attendance until the time of prayer; to spend on the family; to give charity; and to return on a different road other than that of arrival. It is to be prayed as two rakʿahs before the sermon. Takbīr is made in the first (after the opening supplication but before seeking refuge) six times. In the second, it is made five times before recitation. The hands are raised with every takbīr while saying, “Allāh is ever Greatest. Much praise belongs to Allāh, Glory to Him morning and evening. May the prayer of Allāh and plentiful peace be upon Muhammad and his family.” If desired, something else can be said.
There is no dhikr that should be mentioned after the final tabkīr of each of them. Then al-Fātiḥah is recited followed by Sabbiḥ [43] in the first rakʿah, and al-Ghāshiyah in the second. After the salām, two sermons are delivered, the rulings of which are like that of the Friday sermons, including the impermissibility of speaking during the sermon.
It is recommended to begin the first with nine continuous takbīrs and the second with seven, while standing. On the Fitṛ, those in attendance are encouraged to give charity and are told what to distribute. They should be encouraged on Aḍḥā to slaughter a sacrificial animal, as well as taught its rulings. The extra takbīrs, dhikr between them, and the sermons, are recommended.
Performing voluntary prayers or to making up a missed prayer in its location (before the prayer or after it) just before departing is disliked

‫‪If missed, it is recommended to make it up the same day in its prescribed‬‬ ‫.‪manner‬‬
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َو َﺻَﻼُة اﻟِﻌﯿَﺪْﯾ ِﻦ ﻓَ ْﺮ ُض ِﻛﻔَﺎﯾٍَﺔ، َو َوْﻗﺘَُﻬﺎ َﻛ َﺼَﻼِة اﻟ ﱡﻀ َﺢ ى .‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ُﺮو ُﻃَﻪ ا : َﻛﺎﻟ ُﺠُﻤَﻌِﺔ َﻣﺎ َﻋَﺪا اﻟ ُﺨ ْﻄﺒَﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾُ ْﻌﻠَْﻢ ﺑِﺎﻟِﻌﯿِﺪ إِﱠﻻ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟ ﱠﺰ َوا ِل َﺻﻠﱠْﻮا ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟَﻐِﺪ ﻗَ َﻀﺎء ً.‬
‫َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱠﻦ ﺑِ َﺼ ْﺤ َﺮاَء ﻗَ ِﺮﯾﺒًَﺔ ُﻋ ْﺮﻓﺎ ً.‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﺗَْﺒِﻜﯿ ُﺮ َﻣْﺄُﻣﻮٍم ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َﺻَﻼِة اﻟ ﱡﺼْﺒ ِﺢ َﻋﻠَﻰ أَ ْﺣ َﺴ ِﻦ َﻫْﯿﺌٍَﺔ َﻣﺎ ِﺷﯿًﺎ، َوﺗَﺄَ ﱡﺧ ُﺮ إَِﻣﺎٍم إِﻟَﻰ َوْﻗ ِﺖ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼِة،‬
‫َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﻮ ِﺳَﻌُﺔ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻷَ ْﻫ ِﻞ، َواﻟ ﱠﺼَﺪﻗَُﺔ، َو ُر ُﺟﻮ ُﻋُﻪ ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﻃ ِﺮﯾ ِﻖ ُﻏُﺪ ﱢوه ِ.‬ ‫َوﯾُ َﺼﻠﱢﯿَﻬﺎ َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟ ُﺨ ْﻄﺒَِﺔ، َوﯾَُﻜﺒﱢ ُﺮ ﻓِﻲ اﻷُوﻟَﻰ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻻ ْﺳﺘِْﻔﺘَﺎ ِح َوﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟﺘﱠَﻌ ﱡﻮِذ ِﺳﺘ‪‬ﺎ، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟﺜﱠﺎﻧِﯿَِﺔ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ‬ ‫اﻟﻘِ َﺮاَءِة َﺧ ْﻤ ًﺴﺎ، ﯾِ ْﺮﻓَ ُﻊ ﯾََﺪْﯾِﻪ َﻣ َﻊ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ﺗَ ْﻜﺒِﯿ َﺮٍة َوﯾَﻘُﻮل ُ: " ا ﱠﷲُ أَْﻛﺒَ ُﺮ َﻛﺒِﯿﺮاً، َواﻟ َﺤ ْﻤُﺪ ِﱠﷲِ َﻛﺜِﯿ ًﺮا، َو ُﺳْﺒ َﺤﺎ َن ا ﱠﷲِ‬ ‫ﺑُ ْﻜ َﺮًة َوأَ ِﺻﯿ ًﻼ، َو َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻣﺤﱠﻤٍﺪ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ﱢﻲ َوآﻟِِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ ﺗَ ْﺴﻠِﯿﻤﺎً َﻛﺜِﯿﺮا ً" ، َوإِ ْن أَ َﺣ ﱠﺐ ﻗَﺎ َل َﻏْﯿ َﺮ َذﻟِﻚ َ‬
‫.‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾَﺄَﺗِﻲ ﺑِِﺬ ْﻛ ٍﺮ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟﺘﱠ ْﻜﺒِﯿ َﺮِة اﻵ ِﺧ َﺮِة ﻓِﯿِﻬَﻤﺎ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَْﻘ َﺮأُ اﻟﻔَﺎﺗِ َﺤَﺔ ﺛُﱠﻢ َﺳﺒﱢ ْﺢ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠﺮ ْﻛَﻌِﺔ اﻷُوﻟَﻰ ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻟَﻐﺎ ِﺷﯿََﺔ ﻓِﻲ‬ ‫اﻟﺜﱠﺎﻧِﯿَِﺔ، ﻓَﺈَِذا َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ َﺧ َﻄ َﺐ ُﺧ ْﻄﺒَﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ، َوأَ ْﺣَﻜﺎُﻣُﻬَﻤﺎ َﻛ ُﺨ ْﻄﺒَﺘَ ْﻲ اﻟ ُﺠُﻤَﻌِﺔ َﺣﺘﱠﻰ ﻓِﻲ ﺗَ ْﺤ ِﺮﯾِﻢ اﻟَﻜَﻼِم َﺣﺎ َل اﻟ ُﺨ ْﻄﺒَﺔ ِ‬
‫.‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ أَ ْن ﯾَ ْﺴﺘَْﻔﺘِـ َﺢ اﻷُوﻟَﻰ ﺑِﺘِ ْﺴ ِﻊ ﺗَ ْﻜﺒِﯿ َﺮا ٍت ﻧَ َﺴﻘﺎً، َواﻟﺜﱠﺎﻧِﯿََﺔ ﺑِ َﺴْﺒ ٍﻊ ﻗَﺎﺋِﻤﺎً، ﯾَ ُﺤـﺜﱡُﻬْﻢ ﻓِﻲ اﻟﻔِ ْﻄ ِﺮ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﺪﻗَِﺔ‬ ‫َوﯾُﺒَﯿﱢ ُﻦ ﻟَُﻬْﻢ َﻣﺎ ﯾُ ْﺨ ِﺮ ُﺟﻮ َن، َوﯾُ َﺮ ﱢﻏﺒُُﻬْﻢ ﻓِﻲ اﻷَ ْﺿ َﺤﻰ ﻓِﻲ اﻷُ ْﺿ ِﺤﯿَِﺔ، َوﯾُﺒَﯿﱢ ُﻦ ﻟَُﻬْﻢ ُﺣ ْﻜَﻤَﻪ ا . َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﻜﺒِﯿ َﺮا ُت‬
‫اﻟ ﱠﺰ َواﺋُِﺪ َواﻟﱢﺬ ْﻛ ُﺮ ﺑَْﯿﻨَُﻬَﻤﺎ َواﻟ ُﺨ ْﻄﺒَﺘَﺎ ِن ُﺳﻨﱠﺔ ٌ.‬ ‫َوُﻛ ِﺮَه ﺗَﻨَﻔﱡ ٌﻞ َوﻗَ َﻀﺎُء ﻓَﺎﺋِﺘٍَﺔ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼِة ﺑَِﻤ ْﻮ ِﺿِﻌَﻬﺎ َوﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َﻫﺎ ﻗُﺒَْﯿ َﻞ ُﻣﻔَﺎ َرﻗَﺘِﻪ ِ.‬
‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻟَِﻤ ْﻦ ﻓَﺎﺗَْﺘُﻪ ﻗَ َﻀﺎ ُؤ َﻫﺎ ﻓِﻲ ﯾَ ْﻮِﻣَﻬﺎ َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﺻﻔَﺘَِﻪ ا .‬
‫‪Takbīr of ʿEid‬‬ ‫‪Unrestricted takbīr is recommended. It is also recommended to utter it‬‬ ‫,‪publicly and aloud (for males only [44] ) during the night of both ʿEids‬‬ ‫‪while proceeding to attend them, the Fitṛ being more emphasized, until the‬‬ ‫‪end of their sermons, and during all 10 days of Dhul-Hijjah. The restricted‬‬ ‫,‪takbīr proceeds every obligatory prayer performed in congregation‬‬ ‫‪beginning from fajr prayer on the day of ʿArafah until ʿasr on the last day‬‬ ‫‪of tashrīq [45] . For the muḥrim [46] , it begins from ẓuhr prayer on the day of‬‬ ‫.‪naḥr. The Imām is to make the takbīr while facing the people‬‬ ‫‪It is not recommended after the ʿEid prayer. Its manner, uttered in an even‬‬ ‫‪number [47] , is; “Allāh is the greatest, Allāh is the greatest, there is no‬‬

deity worthy of worship except Allāh. Allāh is the greatest, Allāh is the greatest, To Allāh belongs all praise.” Saying, “May Allāh accept from both us and you,” is not blameworthy, nor is taʿrīf [48] throughout the lands during the evening of ʿArafah.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ اﻟﺘﱠ ْﻜﺒِﯿ ُﺮ اﻟُﻤ ْﻄﻠَ ُﻖ، َوإِﻇَﻬﺎ ُرُه، َو َﺟ ْﻬ ُﺮ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ أُْﻧﺜَﻰ ﺑِِﻪ ﻓِﻲ ﻟَْﯿﻠَﺘَﻲ اﻟِﻌﯿَﺪْﯾ ِﻦ، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟ ُﺨ ُﺮو ِج إِﻟَْﯿِﻬَﻤﺎ إِﻟَﻰ‬ ‫ﻓَ َﺮا ِغ اﻟ ُﺨ ْﻄﺒَِﺔ ﻓِﯿِﻬَﻤﺎ، َوﻓِ ْﻄ ٌﺮ آَﻛُﺪ، َوﻓِﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َﻋ ْﺸ ِﺮ ِذي اﻟ ِﺤ ﱠﺠِﺔ، َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﻜﺒِﯿ ُﺮ اﻟُﻤﻘَﯿﱠُﺪ َﻋﻘِ َﺐ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ﻓَ ِﺮﯾ َﻀٍﺔ ﻓِﻲ‬ ‫َﺟَﻤﺎ َﻋٍﺔ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺻَﻼِة ﻓَ ْﺠ ٍﺮ ﯾَ ْﻮَم َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ إِﻟَﻰ َﻋ ْﺼ ِﺮ آ ِﺧ ِﺮ أَﯾﱠﺎِم اﻟﺘﱠ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ ِﻖ إِﱠﻻ ﻟُِﻤ ْﺤ ِﺮٍم ﻓَِﻤ ْﻦ َﺻَﻼِة ُﻇ ْﻬ ٍﺮ ﯾَ ْﻮَم‬
.ِ ‫اﻟﻨﱠ ْﺤ ِﺮ، َوﯾَُﻜﺒﱢ ُﺮ اِﻹَﻣﺎُم ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَْﻘﺒِ َﻞ اﻟﻨَﺎس‬ ،‫َوَﻻ ﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﻋﻘِ َﺐ َﺻَﻼِة ِﻋﯿٍﺪ ﻓِﻲ ِﺻﻔَﺘِِﻪ َﺷْﻔ ًﻊ ا : ا ﱠﷲُ أَْﻛﺒَ ُﺮ، ا ﱠﷲُ أَْﻛﺒَ ُﺮ، َﻻ إِﻟََﻪ إِﱠﻻ ا ﱠﷲُ َوا ﱠﷲُ أَْﻛﺒَ ُﺮ، ا ﱠﷲُ أَْﻛﺒَ ُﺮ‬
.ُ ‫َوِﱠﷲِ اﻟ َﺤ ْﻤﺪ‬ .ِ ‫َوَﻻ ﺑَْﺄ َس ﺑِﻘَ ْﻮﻟِِﻪ ﻟَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮه ِ: ﺗَﻘَﺒﱠ َﻞ ا ﱠﷲُ ﻣﻨﱠﺎ َوِﻣْﻨ َﻚ، َوَﻻ ﺑِﺎﻟﺘﱠ ْﻌ ِﺮﯾ ِﻒ َﻋ ِﺸﯿﱠَﺔ ﻟَْﯿﻠَِﺔ َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ ﺑِﺎﻷَ ْﻣ َﺼﺎر‬
Eclipse Prayer Ṣalāt al-kusūf is recommended and without a sermon. Its time is from its onset until emergence and is not made up if missed. It consists of two rakʿahs. In each rakʿah there are two standings and two bowings. It is recommended to recite a long chapter and prolong the tasbīḥ, as well as making the first rakʿah longer than the second. It is valid if performed like a voluntary prayer. It is not performed for any other sign (e.g. darkness during the day, light during the night, strong wind, or thunder), except for a continuous earthquake.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َﺻَﻼُة اﻟُﻜ ُﺴﻮ ِف ُﺳﻨﱠٌﺔ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ُﺧ ْﻄﺒٍَﺔ، َو َوْﻗﺘَُﻬﺎ ِﻣ ْﻦ اْﺑﺘَِﺪاﺋِِﻪ إِﻟَﻰ اﻟﺘَ َﺠﻠﱢﻲ، َوَﻻ ﺗُْﻘ َﻀﻰ إِ ْن ﻓَﺎﺗَ ْﺖ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ‬ ،‫َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَﺎ ِن، َﻛ ﱡﻞ َر ْﻛَﻌٍﺔ ﺑِﻘَﯿَﺎَﻣْﯿ ِﻦ َو ُرُﻛﻮ َﻋْﯿﻦ ِ . َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﺗَ ْﻄ ِﻮﯾ ُﻞ ُﺳﻮ َرٍة َوﺗَ ْﺴﺒِﯿ ٍﺢ، َوَﻛ ْﻮ ُن أُوﻟَﻰ ُﻛ ﱟﻞ أَ ْﻃ َﻮ ُل‬ ‫َوﺗَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ َﻛﺎﻟﻨﱠﺎﻓِﻠَِﺔ، َوَﻻ ﯾُ َﺼﻠﱠﻰ ِﻵﯾٍَﺔ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه َﻛ ُﻈﻠَْﻤٍﺔ ﻧََﻬﺎراً، َو ِﺿﯿَﺎٍء ﻟَْﯿ ًﻼ، َو ِرﯾـ ٍﺢ َﺷِﺪﯾَﺪٍة، َو َﺻ َﻮا ِﻋ َﻖ إِﱠﻻ‬
.ٍ ‫ﻟَِﺰﻟْ َﺰﻟٍَﺔ َداﺋَِﻤﺔ‬
Rain Prayer Ṣalāt al-istisqāʾ is recommended if the land becomes barren and there is a drought. Its manner and rulings are like ʿEid prayer. It, and the previous prayer, are more virtuous in congregation. If the Imām wishes to go out

for it, he is to exhort the people, order them to repent, to abandon oppression, leave quarreling, and to give charity and fast—neither of which are binding by his order. He is to assign them a day on which to assemble and he is to go out humbled, submissive, subservient, obedient, clean but not perfumed, in the company of the religious people of righteousness and maturity.
It is recommended for the discerning children, and is permissible for young children and livestock, to attend. The prayer is performed and then one sermon is delivered. It is commenced with takbīr like the ‘Eid sermon. Forgiveness should be sought abundantly and verses that contain an order to do so should be recited. It is recommended to stand out in the rain when it begins, to make wuḍūʿ and ghusl with it, and to bring out furnishings and clothing to be rained on. If it becomes fearfully abundant, it is recommended to say, “O Allāh, let it pass us and not fall upon us, but upon the hills and mountains, and the center of the valleys, and upon the forested lands. ‘Our Lord, and burden us not with that which we have no ability to bear’” until the end of the verse e.g. al-Baqarah: 286.
It is recommended to say, “Rain has showered us, by the grace and mercy of Allāh.”
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ .ُ ‫ﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺻَﻼُة اﻻ ْﺳﺘِ ْﺴﻘَﺎِء إَِذا أَ ْﺟَﺪﺑَ ْﺖ اﻷَ ْر ُض، َوﻗَ َﺤ َﻂ اﻟَﻤ َﻄﺮ‬ ‫َو ِﺻﻔَﺘَُﻬﺎ َوأَ ْﺣَﻜﺎُﻣَﻬﺎ َﻛ َﺼَﻼِة ِﻋﯿٍﺪ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ َواﻟﱠﺘِﻲ ﻗَْﺒﻠََﻬﺎ َﺟَﻤﺎ َﻋًﺔ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ، َوإَِذا أََراَد اِﻹَﻣﺎُم اﻟ ُﺨ ُﺮو َج َو َﻋ َﻆ‬ ‫اﻟﻨﱠﺎ َس َوأََﻣ َﺮ ُﻫْﻢ ﺑِﺎﻟﺘﱠ ْﻮﺑَِﺔ َواﻟ ُﺨ ُﺮو ِج ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟَﻤ َﻈﺎﻟِِﻢ، َوﺗَ ْﺮ ِك اﻟﺘَ َﺸﺎ ُﺣ ِﻦ، َواﻟ ﱠﺼَﺪﻗَِﺔ َواﻟ ﱠﺼ ْﻮِم، َوَﻻ ﯾَﻠْ َﺰَﻣﺎ ِن‬ ،‫ﺑﺄَﻣ ِﺮِه، وﯾَِﻌُﺪ ُﻫﻢ ﯾَ ْﻮﻣﺎً ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﺮ ُﺟﻮ َن ﻓِﯿِﻪ، َوﯾَ ْﺨ ُﺮ ُج ُﻣﺘَ َﻮا ِﺿﻌﺎً ُﻣﺘَ َﺨ ﱢﺸﻌﺎً ُﻣﺘََﺬﻟﱢ ًﻼ ُﻣﺘَ َﻀ ﱢﺮﻋﺎً ُﻣﺘَﻨَ ﱢﻈﻔﺎً َﻻ ُﻣﺘَ َﻄﯿﱢﺒًﺎ‬
.ُ ‫َوَﻣَﻌُﻪ أَْﻫ ُﻞ اﻟﱢﺪﯾ ِﻦ َواﻟ ﱠﺼ َﻼ ِح َواﻟ ﱡﺸﯿُﻮخ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ُﺧ ُﺮو ُج َﺻﺒ ﱟﻲ ُﻣَﻤﯿﱢـ ٍﺰ، َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ُﺧ ُﺮو ُج أَ ْﻃﻔَﺎ ٍل، َوﺑََﻬﺎﺋَِﻢ، ﻓَﯿُ َﺼﻠﱢﻲ ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﻄ ُﺐ ُﺧ ْﻄﺒًَﺔ َوا ِﺣَﺪًة ﯾَْﻔﺘَﺘِ ُﺤَﻬﺎ‬
.ِ ‫ﺑِﺎﻟﺘﱠ ْﻜﺒِﯿ ِﺮ َﻛ ُﺨ ْﻄﺒِِﺔ ِﻋﯿٍﺪ، َوﯾُ ْﻜﺜِ ُﺮ ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ اﻻ ْﺳﺘِ ْﻐﻔَﺎ َر َوﻗِ َﺮاَءَة اﻵﯾِﺎ ِت اﻟﱠﺘِﻲ ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ اﻷَ ْﻣ ُﺮ ﺑِﻪ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ُوﻗُﻮ ٌف ﻓِﻲ أَﱠو ِل اﻟَﻤ ْﻄ ِﺮ َوﺗَ َﻮ ﱡﺿ ٌﺆ َوا ْﻏﺘِ َﺴﺎ ٌل ِﻣْﻨُﻪ َوإِ ْﺧ َﺮا ُج َر ْﺣﻠِِﻪ َوﺛِﯿَﺎﺑِِﻪ ﻟِﯿُ ِﺼﯿﺒََﻬﺎ، َوإِ ْن َﻛﺜُ َﺮ َﺣﺘَﻰ‬ ‫ِﺧﯿ َﻒ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻗَ ْﻮل ُ : " اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ َﺣ َﻮاﻟَْﯿﻨَﺎ َوَﻻ َﻋﻠَْﯿﻨَﺎ، اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ ﱢﻈ َﺮا ِب َواﻵَﻛﺎِم َوﺑُ ُﻄﻮ ِن اﻷَ ْوِدﯾَِﺔ‬
.[286 : ‫َوَﻣﻨَﺎﺑِ ِﺖ اﻟ َﺸ َﺠﺮ ِ" ﴿ َرﺑﱠﻨَﺎ َوَﻻ ﺗُ َﺤﱢﻤﻠْﻨَﺎ َﻣﺎ َﻻ َﻃﺎﻗََﺔ ﻟَﻨَﺎ ﺑِِﻪ﴾ اﻵﯾَُﺔ [ اﻟﺒﻘﺮ ة‬ ."ِ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻗَ ْﻮل ُ: " ُﻣ ِﻄ ْﺮﻧَﺎ ﺑِﻔَ ْﻀ ِﻞ ا ﱠﷲِ َو َر ْﺣَﻤﺘِﻪ‬

Funerals It is recommended to prepare for death and remember it often. It is also recommended to visit the sick every other day at the onset of their sickness, in both the day and night, as well as during the nights of Ramaḍān. It is also recommended to remind them to repent and write a will. Visitors should pray for their health and wellbeing and should not sit with them too long. It is a must that they have a good assumption of Allāh.
It is not obligatory to medicate, even if there is perceived benefit. Abandoning it is more virtuous and it is prohibited with the impermissible. It is permissible to write some Qurʾānic verses and dhikr and place them in a vessel and have the pregnant (due to labor difficulties) and the ill drink it. If it descends upon them, it is recommended for the gentlest of their family to quench their thirst with water or a drink, moisten their lips with cotton, to implicitly direct them to say, “ There is no deity worthy of worship except Allāh” once (and no more than three times) if they speak, they are gently urged to repeat it, and to recite alFātiḥah.
It is recommended at its time to turn them toward the qiblah on their right side, provided space is available; otherwise on their back with their soles facing the qiblah. They are to rely upon Allāh regarding those they love and bequeath to those they believe to be most deserving. If they die, it is recommended to close their eyes, which is permissible to be done by a maḥram [49] male or female. It is disliked for menstruating women or anyone in a major state of ritual impurity to do it, or to come near them.
It is also recommended: to say, “In the name of Allāh, upon the passing of Allāh’s messenger”; to fasten the jaws closed; to soften the joints; to remove the clothes; to cover them with cloth; to be hasty in preparing them if they did not die suddenly; and to divide the will and settle their debt.
‫ِﻛﺘَﺎ ُب اﻟ َﺠﻨَﺎﺋِﺰ‬ .ِ ‫ﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ اﻻ ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﺪاُد ﻟِﻠَْﻤ ْﻮ ِت، َواﻹِ ْﻛﺜَﺎ ُر ِﻣ ْﻦ ِذ ْﻛ ِﺮه‬
‫ﺎ ِﻣ ْﻦ أَﱠو ِل اﻟَﻤ َﺮ ِض ﺑُ ْﻜ َﺮًة َو َﻋ ِﺸﯿﱠًﺔ، َوﻓِﻲ َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن ﻟَْﯿ ًﻼ، َوﺗَْﺬِﻛﯿ ُﺮُه اﻟﺘﱠ ْﻮﺑََﺔ‬‫َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ِﻋﯿَﺎَدُة َﻣ ِﺮﯾ ٍﺾ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ ِﻏﺒ‬ ،ِ‫َواﻟ َﻮ ِﺻﯿﱠَﺔ، َوﯾَْﺪ ُﻋﻮ ﻟَُﻪ َﻋﺎﺋٌِﺪ ﺑِﺎﻟَﻌﺎﻓِﯿَِﺔ َواﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼ ِح، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﻄﯿ ُﻞ اﻟ ُﺠﻠُﻮ َس ِﻋْﻨَﺪُه، َوﯾَْﻨﺒَِﻐﻲ أَ ْن ﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺴ َﻦ َﻇﻨﱠُﻪ ﺑِﺎ ﱠﷲ‬

ْ

َُ

ُ َْ ُ ُ ُ ْ َ َ

‫ﱠ‬

َ

‫َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ اﻟﺘﱠَﺪا ِوي، َوﻟ ْﻮ ﻇ ﱠﻦ ﻧَْﻔَﻌُﻪ، َوﺗَ ْﺮُﻛُﻪ أْﻓ َﻀﻞ، َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم ﺑُِﻤ َﺤ ﱠﺮٍم، َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح َﻛْﺘ ُﺐ ﻗُ ْﺮآ ٍن َوِذ ْﻛ ٍﺮ ﺑِﺈِﻧَﺎٍء‬ ‫ﻟِ َﺤﺎِﻣ ٍﻞ ﻟُِﻌ ْﺴ ِﺮ اﻟ ِﻮَﻻَدِة، َوَﻣ ِﺮﯾ ٍﺾ َوﯾُ ْﺴﻘِﯿَﺎﻧِِﻪ، َوإَِذا ﻧَ َﺰ َل ﺑِِﻪ ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ِﻷَ ْرﻓَ ِﻖ أَْﻫﻠِِﻪ ﺑِِﻪ ﺗََﻌﺎ ُﻫُﺪ ﺑَ ﱡﻞ َﺣﻠْﻘِِﻪ ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء أَْو‬ ‫َﺷ َﺮا ٍب، َوﺗَْﻨِﺪﯾَُﺔ َﺷﻔَﺘَْﯿِﻪ ﺑِﻘُ ْﻄﻨٍَﺔ، َوﺗَﻠْﻘِﯿﻨُﻪ ُ : َﻻ إِﻟََﻪ إِﱠﻻ ا ﱠﷲُ " َﻣ ﱠﺮًة َوﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺰْد َﻋﻠَﻰ ﺛََﻼ ٍث إِﱠﻻ أَ ْن ﯾِﺘََﻜﻠﱠَﻢ ﻓَﯿُِﻌﯿُﺪُه‬
.ِ ‫ﺑِ ِﺮْﻓ ٍﻖ، َوﻗِﺮاَءُة اﻟﻔَﺎﺗِ َﺤﺔ‬ ‫َوﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ِﻋْﻨَﺪُه ﺗَ ْﻮ ِﺟﯿُﻬُﻪ إِﻟَﻰ اﻟﻘِْﺒﻠَِﺔ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺟْﻨﺒِِﻪ اﻷَْﯾَﻤ ِﻦ َﻣ َﻊ َﺳَﻌِﺔ اﻟَﻤَﻜﺎ ِن َوإِﱠﻻ ﻓََﻌﻠَﻰ َﻇ ْﻬ ِﺮِه َوأَ ْﺧَﻤ َﺼﺎُه إِﻟَﻰ‬ ‫اﻟﻘِْﺒﻠَِﺔ، َوﯾَ ْﻌﺘَِﻤُﺪ َﻋﻠَﻰ ا ﱠﷲِ ﻓِﯿَﻤ ْﻦ ﯾُ ِﺤ ﱡﺐ، َوﯾُﻮ ِﺻﻲ ﻟِ َﻸ ْر َﺟ ِﺢ ﻓِﻲ ﻧَ َﻈ ِﺮِه؛ ﻓَﺈَِذا َﻣﺎ َت ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﺗَ ْﻐِﻤﯿ ُﺾ َﻋْﯿﻨَْﯿِﻪ، َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح‬
.ُ ‫ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣ ْﺤ َﺮٍم َذَﻛ ٍﺮ أَْو أُْﻧﺜَﻰ، َوﯾُ ْﻜ َﺮُه ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺣﺎﺋِ ٍﺾ َو ُﺟﻨُ ٍﺐ، َوأَ ْن ﯾَْﻘ َﺮﺑَﺎه‬ ‫َوﻗَ ْﻮل ُ : " ﺑِ ْﺴِﻢ ا ﱠﷲِ َو َﻋﻠَﻰ َوﻓَﺎِة َر ُﺳﻮ ِل ا ﱠﷲِ َﺻﻠَﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠﻢ َ" ، َو َﺷﱡﺪ ﻟَ ْﺤـﯿَْﯿِﻪ ﺑَِﻌ َﺼﺎﺑٍَﺔ، َوﺗَﻠْﯿِﯿ ُﻦ‬ ‫َﻣﻔَﺎ ِﺻﻠِِﻪ، َو َﺧﻠْ ُﻊ ﺛِﯿَﺎﺑِِﻪ، و َﺳْﺘ ُﺮُه ﺑِﺜَ ْﻮ ٍب، َوإِﺳ َﺮا ُع ﺗَ ْﺠِﻬﯿ ِﺰِه إِ ْن َﻣﺎ َت َﻏْﯿ َﺮ ﻓَ ْﺠـﺄٍَة، َوﺗَْﻔ ِﺮﻗَُﺔ َو ِﺻﯿﱠﺘِِﻪ، وﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ‬
.ِ ‫ﻓﻲ ﻗَ َﻀﺎِء دﯾﻨِﻪ‬
Washing Washing the deceased is a communal obligation, except for the martyred in battle and wrongly killed (even if they both be female or not of legal capacity). It is a prerequisite that the water be ṭahūr and permissible. It is a prerequisite that the washer be Muslim, sane, and of discerning age; it is preferred they be trustworthy and know the rulings of washing. When washing begins, their ʿawrah is to be concealed from view under a covering.
The attendance of anyone else, besides an assistant, is disliked. An intention is made and Allāh’s name is mentioned, which is an obligation just like the washing of someone alive. It is recommended to raise the head (of someone not pregnant) close to the sitting position and lightly press their stomach [50] . Incense should be burned, and abundant water should be poured. The washer should then wrap their hand in a moist cloth and clean the deceased. It is impermissible to touch the ʿawrah of someone seven years old. The pointer finger and thumb (both wrapped in cloth moistened with water) are placed between their lips to clean their teeth as well as inside their nostrils to clean them both. It is recommended that wuḍūʾ be performed for them (without putting water in their mouth or nose). Then their head is washed with the foam of the sidr [51] and their body with its sediment. The right side of the body should be washed first and then the left. Water is then poured over their entire body.
Washing them only once if nothing comes out is disliked. It is obligatory to repeat it up to seven times if something does come out. If something comes out after that, they are to be stuffed with cotton. If that does not

hold, pure dirt is used. The area is washed and then it is obligatory to make wuḍūʾ for them. The miscarriage of four months is treated like a live newborn.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ .َ ‫َو َﻏ ْﺴﻠُُﻪ ﻓَ ْﺮ ُض ِﻛﻔَﺎﯾٍَﺔ ِﺳ َﻮى َﺷِﻬﯿِﺪ َﻣ ْﻌ َﺮَﻛٍﺔ، َوَﻣْﻘﺘُﻮ ٍل ُﻇﻠْﻤﺎً، وﻟَْﻮ َﻛﺎﻧَﺎ أُْﻧﺜَﯿَْﯿ ِﻦ أَْو َﻏْﯿ َﺮ ُﻣَﻜﻠﱠﻔَْﯿﻦ‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ﻓِﻲ َﻣﺎٍء َﻃُﻬﻮ ِرﯾﱠٌﺔ َوإِﺑَﺎ َﺣٌﺔ، َوﻓِﻲ َﻏﺎ ِﺳ ٍﻞ إِ ْﺳَﻼٌم، َو َﻋْﻘ ٌﻞ، َوﺗَ ْﻤﯿِﯿ ٌﺰ، َواﻷْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ﺛِﻘٌَﺔ َﻋﺎ ِر ٌف ﺑِﺄَ ْﺣَﻜﺎِم‬
.ٍ ‫اﻟُﻐ ْﺴﻞ ِ. َوإَِذا أَ َﺧَﺬ ﻓِﻲ َﻏ ْﺴﻠِِﻪ َﺳﺘَ َﺮ َﻋ ْﻮ َرﺗَُﻪ َﻋ ْﻦ اﻟُﻌﯿُﻮ ِن ﺗَ ْﺤ َﺖ ِﺳْﺘﺮ‬ ‫َوُﻛ ِﺮَه ُﺣ ُﻀﻮ ُر َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ُﻣِﻌﯿ ٍﻦ ﻓِﻲ َﻏ ْﺴﻠِِﻪ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﻧَ َﻮى و َﺳﱠﻤﻰ َو ُﺟﻮﺑﺎً َﻛَﻐ ْﺴ ِﻞ اﻟ َﺤ ِﻲ ّ. َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ أَ ْن ﯾَ ْﺮﻓَ َﻊ َرأْ َس‬ ‫َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﺣﺎِﻣ ٍﻞ إِﻟَﻰ ﻗُ ْﺮ ِب ُﺟﻠُﻮ ِﺳِﻪ، َوﯾَ ْﻌ ِﺼ َﺮ ﺑَ ْﻄﻨَُﻪ ﺑِ ِﺮْﻓ ٍﻖ، َوﯾََﻜﻮ َن ﺛَﱠﻢ ﺑَ ُﺨﻮ ٌر، َوﯾُ ْﻜﺜِ َﺮ َﺻ ﱠﺐ اﻟَﻤﺎِء ِﺣﯿﻨَﺌٍِﺬ ﺛُﱠﻢ‬ ‫ﯾَﻠُ ﱡﻒ َﻋﻠَﻰ ﯾَِﺪِه ِﺧ ْﺮﻗًَﺔ َﻣْﺒﻠُﻮﻟًَﺔ ﻓَﯿُﻨَ ﱢﺠﯿِﻪ ﺑَِﻪ ا . َو َﺣ ُﺮَم َﻣ ﱡﺲ َﻋ ْﻮ َرِة َﻣ ْﻦ ﻟَُﻪ َﺳْﺒ ُﻊ ِﺳﻨَﯿ َﻦ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُْﺪ ِﺧ ُﻞ إِْﺑَﻬﺎَﻣُﻪ‬ ‫َو َﺳﺒﱠﺎﺑَﺘَُﻪ َو َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻬَﻤﺎ ِﺧ ْﺮﻗٌَﺔ َﻣْﺒﻠُﻮﻟٌَﺔ ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ َﺷﻔَﺘَْﯿِﻪ ﻓَﯿَ ْﻤ َﺴ ُﺢ أَ ْﺳﻨَﺎﻧَُﻪ، َوﻓِﻲ َﻣْﻨ ِﺨ َﺮْﯾِﻪ ﻓَﯿُﻨَ ﱢﻈﻔُُﻬَﻤﺎ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُ َﻮ ﱢﺿﺌُُﻪ‬ ‫ا ْﺳﺘِ ْﺤﺒَﺎﺑﺎً، َوَﻻ ﯾُْﺪ ِﺧ ُﻞ َﻣﺎًء ﻓِﻲ ﻓَِﻤِﻪ َوأَْﻧﻔِِﻪ، َوﯾَ ْﻐ ِﺴ ُﻞ َرأْ َﺳُﻪ ﺑِ َﺮ ْﻏ َﻮِة اﻟ ﱢﺴْﺪ ِر َوﺑََﺪﻧَُﻪ ﺑِﺜُْﻔﻠِِﻪ، َوﯾَ ْﻐ ِﺴ ُﻞ ِﺷﻘﱠُﻪ اﻷَْﯾَﻤ َﻦ‬
.ِ ‫ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻷَْﯾ َﺴ َﺮ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُﻔِﯿ ُﺾ اﻟَﻤﺎَء َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺟِﻤﯿ ِﻊ ﺑََﺪﻧِﻪ‬ ‫َوُﻛ ِﺮَه اْﻗﺘِ َﺼﺎ ٌر َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻏ ْﺴﻠِِﻪ َﻣ ﱠﺮًة إِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﺮ ْج َﺷ ْﻲٌء؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن َﺧ َﺮ َج َو َﺟ َﺐ إِ َﻋﺎَدﺗُُﻪ إِﻟَﻰ َﺳْﺒ ٍﻊ؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن َﺧ َﺮ َج‬ ‫ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َﻫﺎ ُﺣ ِﺸ َﻲ ﺑِﻘُ ْﻄ ٍﻦ؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺴﺘَ ْﻤ ِﺴ ْﻚ ﻓَﺒِ ِﻄﯿ ٍﻦ ُﺣ ﱟﺮ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَ ْﻐ ِﺴ ُﻞ اﻟَﻤ َﺤ ﱠﻞ َوﯾُ َﻮ ﱠﺿﺄُ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑﺎ ً. و َﺳْﻘ ُﻂ اﻷَ ْرﺑََﻌِﺔ‬
.ً ‫أَ ْﺷُﻬ ٍﺮ َﻛَﻤ ْﻮﻟُﻮٍد َﺣﯿّﺎ‬
Shrouding Their shrouding is a communal obligation. It is an obligatory right of Allāh and a right of the deceased, comprised of one garment which does not show the skin and completely covers them. It is recommended to shroud a man with three white cotton shrouds; anymore is disliked. After being fumed with fragrance e.g. oud [52] , they are laid on top of each other. The finest of them is fixed as the outside layer with ḥanūṭ [53] between each. They are then laid down on top of them. The left side of the inner-most shroud is brought to their right side and then the right is brought to the left. The second and then the third are fashioned in a similar manner. Most of the excess is to be gathered at the head and then they are tied, to be later untied in the grave.
Five garments are recommended for women and hermaphrodites including an izār; khimār; qamīṣ [54] ; and two shrouds. For young girls, a qamīṣ and two shrouds are recommended. For boys, one garment is recommended; three are permissible unless their inheritors are not of legal capacity.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ .ُ ‫َوﺗَ ْﻜﻔِﯿﻨُُﻪ ﻓَ ْﺮ ُض ِﻛﻔَﺎﯾٍَﺔ، َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﻟِ َﺤ ﱢﻖ ا ﱠﷲِ ﺗََﻌﺎﻟَﻰ َوﻟِ َﺤـﻘﱢِﻪ ﺛَ ْﻮ ٌب َوا ِﺣٌﺪ َﻻ ﯾَ ِﺼ ُﻒ اﻟﺒَ َﺸ َﺮَة ﯾَ ْﺴﺘُ ُﺮ َﺟِﻤﯿَﻌﻪ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﺗَ ْﻜﻔِﯿ ُﻦ َر ُﺟ ٍﻞ ﻓِﻲ ﺛَ َﻼ ِث ﻟَﻔَﺎﺋِ َﻒ ﺑِﯿ ٍﺾ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻗُ ْﻄ ٍﻦ، َوُﻛ ِﺮَه ﻓِﻲ أَْﻛﺜَ َﺮ، ﺗُْﺒ َﺴ ُﻂ َﻋﻠَﻰ ﺑَ ْﻌ ِﻀَﻬﺎ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﺗَْﺒ ِﺨﯿ ِﺮ َﻫﺎ‬ ‫ﺑِﻨﺤ ِﻮ ُﻋﻮٍد، َوﺗُ ْﺠَﻌ ُﻞ اﻟ ﱠﻈﺎ ِﻫ َﺮُة أَ ْﺣ َﺴﻨََﻬﺎ َواﻟ َﺤﻨُﻮ ُط ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ﺑَْﯿﻨََﻬﺎ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُﻮ َﺿ ُﻊ َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَﻠْﻘِﯿﺎً ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُ َﺮﱡد َﻃ َﺮ ُف‬ ‫اﻟﻠﱢﻔَﺎﻓَِﺔ اﻟُﻌﻠْﯿَﺎ ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟ َﺠﺎﻧِ ِﺐ اﻷَْﯾ َﺴ ِﺮ َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﺷﻘﱢِﻪ اﻷَْﯾَﻤ ِﻦ، ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻷَْﯾَﻤ ُﻦ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻷَْﯾ َﺴ ِﺮ، ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻟﺜﱠﺎﻧِﯿَُﺔ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟﺜﱠﺎﻟِﺜَِﺔ‬
.ِ ‫َﻛَﺬﻟِ َﻚ، َوﯾُ ْﺠَﻌ ُﻞ أَْﻛﺜَ ُﺮ اﻟﻔَﺎ ِﺿ ِﻞ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ َرأْ ِﺳِﻪ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَ ْﻌﻘُِﺪ َﻫﺎ َوﺗُ َﺤ ﱡﻞ ﻓَﻲ اﻟﻘَْﺒﺮ‬ ،‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ِﻻ ْﻣ َﺮأٍَة َو ُﺧْﻨﺜَﻰ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴُﺔ أَْﺛ َﻮاب ٍ : إَِزا ٌر َو ِﺧَﻤﺎ ٌر َوﻗَِﻤﯿ ٌﺺ َوﻟِﻔَﺎﻓَﺘَﺎ ِن، َوﻟِ َﺼِﻐﯿ َﺮٍة ﻗَِﻤﯿ ٌﺺ َوﻟِﻔَﺎﻓَﺘَﺎ ِن‬
.ٍ ‫َوﻟِ َﺼﺒِ ﱟﻲ ﺛَ ْﻮ ٌب َوا ِﺣٌﺪ، َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ﻓِﻲ ﺛََﻼﺛٍَﺔ َﻣﺎ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺮﺛُُﻪ َﻏْﯿ ُﺮ ُﻣَﻜﻠﱠﻒ‬
Funeral Prayer Praying over the deceased is a communal obligation which is forgone with one person of legal capacity, even if they be a female or bondservant. Offering it in congregation is recommended.
It has eight prerequisites which are: intention; legal capacity; facing the qiblah; covering the ʿawrah; being free of najāsah; the presence of the deceased (if they are in the country); both the one praying and being prayed upon being Muslim; and their purification, even if with earth.

It has seven pillars which are: standing for the obligatory prayer; the four takbīrs; recitation of al-Fātiḥah; praying upon the Prophet (peace be upon him); supplication for the deceased; the salām; and sequence.
It is recommended for the Imām and the lone individual to stand at the chest of a man and the middle of a woman.
Its description is as follows: make an intention then make takbīr and read al-Fātiḥah; make takbīr and pray upon the Prophet (peace be upon him) (as found in the tashahhud); make takbīr and supplicate for the deceased, which is more virtuous if done with something reported; make takbīr and briefly pause; and then make taslīm (one time is sufficient), even if, “and the mercy of Allāh,” is not said.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ .ً ‫َواﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼُة َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ﻓَ ْﺮ ُض ِﻛﻔَﺎﯾٍَﺔ، َوﺗَ ْﺴﻘُ ُﻂ ﺑُِﻤَﻜﻠﱠ ٍﻒ، َوﻟَْﻮ أُْﻧﺜَﻰ أَْو َﻋْﺒﺪاً، َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺟَﻤﺎ َﻋﺔ‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ُﺮو ُﻃَﻬﺎ ﺛََﻤﺎﻧِﯿَﺔ ٌ: اﻟﻨﱢﯿﱠُﺔ، َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﻜﻠِﯿ ُﻒ، َوا ْﺳﺘِْﻘﺒَﺎ ُل اﻟﻘِْﺒﻠَِﺔ، َو َﺳْﺘ ُﺮ اﻟَﻌ ْﻮ َرِة، َوا ْﺟﺘِﻨَﺎ ُب اﻟﻨﱠ َﺠﺎ َﺳِﺔ، َو ُﺣ ُﻀﻮ ُر‬ .ٍ ‫اﻟَﻤﯿﱢ ِﺖ إِ ْن َﻛﺎ َن ﺑِﺎﻟﺒَﻠَِﺪ، َوإِ ْﺳَﻼُم اﻟُﻤ َﺼﻠﱢﻲ َواﻟُﻤ َﺼﻠﱠﻰ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ، َو َﻃَﻬﺎ َرﺗُُﻬَﻤﺎ َوﻟَْﻮ ﺑِﺘُ َﺮاب‬

‫ﱠ‬

َ َُ

َُ

َ

ْ‫ﱠ‬

َ

ََ

‫َوأ ْرَﻛﺎﻧَُﻬﺎ َﺳْﺒَﻌﺔ ٌ: اﻟﻘِﯿَﺎُم ﻓِﻲ ﻓَ ْﺮ ِﺿَﻬﺎ، َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﻜﺒِﯿ َﺮا ُت اﻷ ْرﺑَ ُﻊ، َوﻗِ َﺮاَءُة اﻟﻔَﺎﺗِ َﺤِﺔ، َواﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼُة َﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ﱢﻲ َﺻﻠﻰ‬ .ُ ‫ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ، َواﻟﱡﺪ َﻋﺎُء ﻟِﻠ ْﻤﯿﱢ ِﺖ، َواﻟ ﱠﺴَﻼُم، َواﻟﺘﱠ ْﺮﺗِﯿﺐ‬
.ٍ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻗِﯿَﺎُم إَِﻣﺎٍم َوُﻣْﻨﻔَ ِﺮٍد ِﻋْﻨَﺪ َﺻْﺪ ِر َر ُﺟ ٍﻞ َو َو َﺳ ِﻂ ا ْﻣ َﺮأَة‬ ‫َو ِﺻﻔَﺘَُﻪ ا : أَ ْن ﯾَْﻨ ِﻮ َي ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَُﻜﺒﱢ َﺮ، َوﯾَْﻘ َﺮأَ اﻟﻔَﺎﺗِ َﺤَﺔ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَُﻜﺒﱢ َﺮ، َوﯾُ َﺼﻠﱢ َﻲ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ﱢﻲ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ َﻛﻔِﻲ‬ ‫اﻟﺘﱠ َﺸﱡﻬِﺪ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَُﻜﺒﱢ َﺮ، َوﯾَْﺪ ُﻋ َﻮ ﻟِﻠَﻤﯿﱢ ِﺖ، َواﻷَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ﺑِ َﺸ ْﻲٍء ِﻣﱠﻤﺎ َو َرَد، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَُﻜﺒﱢ َﺮ، َوﯾَﻘِ َﻒ ﻗَﻠِﯿ ًﻼ َوﯾُ َﺴﻠﱢَﻢ، َوﺗُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ‬
.ِ ‫َوا ِﺣَﺪٌة، َوﻟَْﻮ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَﻘُﻞ ْ : َو َر ْﺣَﻤُﺔ ا ﱠﷲ‬
Burial Transporting, burying, and shrouding the deceased are communal obligations; if fulfilled by a non-believer they are no longer required. It is recommended: to walk in front of the funeral procession and ride behind it; to stay close to it; to move quickly; and to make the grave both deep and wide. The following are disliked: raising the voice during it, even if for some dhikr or Qurʾān; placing wood inside the grave or something which is burned by fire; plastering it; or building, writing, walking, or sitting on it.
It is obligatory that the deceased be faced towards the qiblah, recommended to be placed on the right side, and impermissible to bury two or more in one grave without necessity.
The following are recommended: placing the deceased in from the footend if feasible (if not, then from anywhere); whoever is placing them to say, “In the name of Allāh, upon the religion of Allāh’s messenger (peace be upon him)”; pouring earth over the deceased three times and then heaping it on; implicitly directing the deceased to say the shahādah; supplicating for them after the burial; sprinkling the grave with water; and raising it the height of a hand-span.
It is impermissible to perform a caesarean on a deceased pregnant woman. However, women [55] should extract whom they believe to be alive. If they are unable, she is not to be buried until it dies. If a portion of it comes out while alive, a caesarean is performed for the remainder. If it dies before a caesarean is performed, it is still extracted (sans-caesarean) to be washed and shrouded. If extraction is not possible, whatever has exited is washed and prayed over with her. If it is less than four months, she alone is prayed over.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ .ٍ ‫َو َﺣ ْﻤﻠُُﻪ َوَدْﻓﻨُُﻪ ﻓَ ْﺮ ُض ِﻛﻔَﺎﯾٍَﺔ، َوﯾَ ْﺴﻘُ َﻄﺎ ِن، َوﺗَ ْﻜﻔِﯿ ٌﻦ ﺑَِﻜﺎﻓِﺮ‬
.ُ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ َﻛ ْﻮ ُن َﻣﺎ ٍش أََﻣﺎَم اﻟ َﺠﻨَﺎ َزِة، َو َراِﻛ ٍﺐ َﺧﻠْﻔََﻬﺎ، َوﻗُ ْﺮ ٌب ِﻣْﻨَﻬﺎ، َوإِ ْﺳ َﺮا ٌع ﺑَِﻬﺎ، َوﺗَ ْﻌِﻤﯿ ُﻖ ﻗَْﺒ ٍﺮ َوﺗَ ْﻮ ِﺳﯿُﻌﻪ‬ ،‫َوُﻛ ِﺮَه َرْﻓ ُﻊ اﻟ ﱠﺼﻮ ِت َﻣَﻌَﻬﺎ َوﻟَْﻮ ﺑِِﺬ ْﻛ ٍﺮ، َواﻟﻘُ ْﺮآ ِن، َوإِْد َﺧﺎ ُل اﻟﻘَْﺒ ِﺮ َﺧ َﺸﺒﺎً أَْو َﻣﺎ َﻣ ﱠﺴْﺘُﻪ اﻟﻨﱠﺎ ُر، َوﺗَ ْﺠ ِﺼﯿ ُﺼُﻪ‬
.ِ ‫َوﺑِﻨَﺎٌء، َوِﻛﺘَﺎﺑٌَﺔ، َوَﻣ ْﺸ ٌﻲ، َو ُﺟﻠُﻮ ٌس َﻋﻠَْﯿﻪ‬ ‫َوﯾَﺠ ُﺐ أَ ْن ﯾِ ْﺴﺘَْﻘﺒِ َﻞ ﺑِِﻪ اﻟﻘِْﺒﻠَﺔ َ. َوﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺟْﻨﺒِِﻪ اﻷَْﯾَﻤ ِﻦ، َو َﺣ ُﺮَم َدْﻓ ُﻦ اْﺛﻨَْﯿ ِﻦ ﻓَﺄَ ْﻛﺜَ َﺮ ﻓِﻲ ﻗَْﺒ ٍﺮ إِﱠﻻ ﻟِ َﻀ ُﺮو َرة‬
. ٍ ِ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ أَ ْن ﯾُْﺪ َﺧ َﻞ َﻣﯿﱢ ٌﺖ ِﻣ ْﻦ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ِر ْﺟﻠَْﯿِﻪ إِ ْن َﻛﺎ َن أَ ْﺳَﻬ َﻞ، َوإِﱠﻻ ﻓَِﻤ ْﻦ َﺣْﯿ ُﺚ َﺳُﻬ َﻞ، َوﻗَ ْﻮ ُل ُﻣْﺪ ِﺧﻞ ٍ: " ﺑِ ْﺴِﻢ ا ﱠﷲ‬ ‫َو َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﻣﻠﱠِﺔ َر ُﺳﻮ ِل ا ﱠﷲِ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ " ، َو َﺣْﺜ ُﻮ اﻟﺘﱡ َﺮا ِب َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ﺛََﻼﺛَﺎً ﺗُﱠﻢ ﯾَُﻬﺎ ُل، َوﺗَﻠْﻘِﯿﻨُُﻪ، َواﻟﱡﺪ َﻋﺎُء‬
.ٍ ‫ﻟَُﻪ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟﱠﺪْﻓ ِﻦ، َو َر ﱡش اﻟﻘَْﺒ ِﺮ ﺑَِﻤﺎٍء، َو َرْﻓُﻌُﻪ ﻗَْﺪ َر ِﺷْﺒﺮ‬ ،‫َوإِ ْن َﻣﺎﺗَ ْﺖ َﺣﺎِﻣ ٌﻞ َﺣ ُﺮَم َﺷ ﱡﻖ ﺑَ ْﻄﻨَِﻬﺎ، َوأَ ْﺧ َﺮ َج اﻟﻨﱢ َﺴﺎُء َﻣ ْﻦ ﺗُ ْﺮ َﺟﻰ َﺣﯿَﺎﺗُُﻪ؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﺗََﻌﱠﺬ َر ﻟَْﻢ ﺗُْﺪﻓَ ْﻦ َﺣﺘﱠﻰ ﯾَُﻤﻮ َت‬ ‫ﺎ َﺷ ﱠﻖ اﻟﺒَﺎﻗِﻲ، ﻓَﻠَْﻮ َﻣﺎ َت ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟ ﱠﺸ ﱢﻖ أُ ْﺧ ِﺮ َج َﺣﺘﱠﻰ ﯾُ ْﻐ َﺴ َﻞ، َوﯾَُﻜﻔﱠ ُﻦ ﺑَِﻼ َﺷ ﱟﻖ؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﺗََﻌﱠﺬ َر‬‫َوإِ ْن َﺧ َﺮ َج ﺑَ ْﻌ ُﻀُﻪ َﺣﯿ‬ ‫إِ ْﺧ َﺮا ُﺟُﻪ ُﻏ ِﺴ َﻞ َﻣﺎ َﺧ َﺮ َج ِﻣْﻨُﻪ َو ُﺻﻠﱢ َﻲ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َﻣَﻌَﻬﺎ، َوإِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَُﻜ ْﻦ ﻟَُﻪ أَ ْرﺑََﻌُﺔ أَ ْﺷُﻬ ٍﺮ ﻓَﺄَ ْﻛﺜَ ُﺮ ُﺻﻠﱢ َﻲ َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ ُدوﻧَﻪ‬
. ُ
Condolences It is recommended to give condolences to a Muslim, even if young, within three days. A Muslim grieved by a Muslim is told, “May Allāh magnify your reward, and make your bereavement perfect, and forgive your deceased.” Whoever receives condolences responds by saying, “May Allāh answer your supplication and have mercy upon both us and you.” Any act of piety done to give the reward to a Muslim, either living or dead, will be of benefit to them. It is recommended for men to visit the graves, but disliked for women, and impermissible for them if they know something impermissible will happen. It is permissible to cry for the deceased but nadb [56] , niyāḥah [57] , tearing the clothes, and striking the cheeks, etc. are impermissible. The deceased are aware of their visitors on Friday before the sun rises [58] .
ٌَ

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوَﺗ ْﻌ ِﺰَﯾ ُﺔ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ، َوﻟَ ْﻮ َﺻ ِﻐﯿﺮاً إِﻟَﻰ َﺛَﻼَﺛ ِﺔ أَﱠﯾﺎٍم ُﺳﱠﻨٌﺔ، َﻓُﯿَﻘﺎ ُل ﻟِ ُﻤ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ ُﻣ َﺼﺎ ٌب ِﺑ ُﻤ ْﺴﻠِﻢ ٍ: " أ ْﻋ َﻈَﻢ‬ ُ‫ﺰى ِﺑَﻘ ْﻮل ِ : " اِ ْﺳَﺘ َﺠﺎ َب ا ﱠﷲ‬ ‫ا ﱠﷲُ أَ ْﺟ َﺮ َك َوأَ ْﺣ َﺴ َﻦ َﻋ َﺰا َك، َو َﻏَﻔ َﺮ ﻟِ َﻤﱢﯿِﺘﻚ َ" ، َوَﯾ ُﺮﱡد ُﻣ َﻌ‬
".َ ‫ُد َﻋﺎ َك َو َر ِﺣ َﻤَﻨﺎ َوإِﱠﯾﺎك‬ .َ ‫َوأَ ﱡي ُﻗ ْﺮَﺑ ٍﺔ ُﻓ ِﻌﻠَ ْﺖ َو ُﺟ ِﻌ َﻞ َﺛ َﻮاُﺑ َﻬﺎ ﻟِ ُﻤ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ َﺣ ﱟﻲ أَ ْو َﻣﱢﯿ ٍﺖ َﻧَﻔ َﻌ ُﻪ َذﻟِﻚ‬ . ْ ‫َوُﺗ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ِزَﯾﺎ َرُة اﻟُﻘُﺒﻮ ِر ﻟِﻠ ﱢﺮ َﺟﺎ ِل، َوُﺗ ْﻜ َﺮُه ﻟِﻠﱢﻨ َﺴﺎ ِء، َوإِ ْن َﻋﻠِ ْﻤ َﻦ أَﱠﻧ ُﻪ َﯾَﻘ ُﻊ ِﻣْﻨ ُﻬ ﱠﻦ ُﻣ َﺤ ﱠﺮٌم َﺣ ُﺮ َﻣﺖ‬ .ُ ‫َوَﯾ ُﺠﻮ ُز اﻟُﺒ َﻜﺎ ُء َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ َﻤﱢﯿ ِﺖ، َوَﯾ ْﺤ ُﺮُم َﻧ ْﺪ ٌب، َوِﻧَﯿﺎ َﺣٌﺔ، َو َﺷ ﱡﻖ َﺛ ْﻮ ٍب، َوﻟَ ْﻄُﻢ َﺧﱟﺪ َوَﻧ ْﺤ ُﻮه‬
.ِ ‫َوَﯾ ْﻌ ِﺮ ُف اﻟ َﻤﱢﯿ ُﺖ َزاِﺋ َﺮُه َﯾ ْﻮَم اﻟ ُﺠ ُﻤ َﻌ ِﺔ َﻗْﺒ َﻞ ُﻃﻠُﻮ ِع اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﻤﺲ‬

Zakāt [59] Its obligatory nature has five perquisites which are: Islām; freedom (but not completely and thus obligatory upon the partially subjugated per the degree of their ownership); possessing the niṣāb [60] ; full ownership; and completion of one lunar year. It is obligatory upon the wealth of both the young and insane.
It is applied to the following five things: livestock; earthly yields; honey; money; and merchandise.
Its obligation is forgone with the presence of a debt, which diminishes the niṣāb. Whoever dies, while owing zakāt, will have it taken from their estate.
The following are prerequisites for livestock: that they be for milking, breeding, or pasturing (not for labor); that they graze in permissible fields for most of the year; and that they reach the niṣāb.
The lowest niṣāb for camels is five, for which one sheep is due. For 10, there are two. For 15, there are three and for 20, there are four. For 25, there is a one-year-old she-camel. For 36, there is a two-year-old shecamel. For 46, there is a three-year-old she-camel. For 76, there are two two-year-old she-camels. For 91, there are two three-year-old she-camels. For 121, there are three two-year-old she-camels. Then for every 40 thereafter, there is one two-year-old she-camel and for every 50, there is one three-year-old she-camel.

‫ِﻛَﺘﺎ ُب اﻟﱠﺰَﻛﺎِة‬

َ

َ ََ ُ َ َ ُ

َ

َْ ُ

ُُ

‫ُﺷ ُﺮو ُط ُو ُﺟﻮِﺑ َﻬﺎ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴ ُﺔ أ ْﺷَﯿﺎء َ: اِﻹ ْﺳَﻼُم، َواﻟ ُﺤ ﱢﺮﱠﯾ ُﺔ َﻻ َﻛ َﻤﺎﻟُ َﻬﺎ، َﻓَﺘ ِﺠ ُﺐ َﻋﻠﻰ ُﻣَﺒﱠﻌ ٍﺾ ِﺑَﻘَﺪ ِر‬ ‫ُﻣْﻠ ِﻜ ِﻪ، َو ُﻣْﻠ ُﻚ اﻟﱢﻨ َﺼﺎ ِب، َواﻟ ُﻤْﻠ ُﻚ اﻟﱠﺘﺎﱡم، َوَﺗ َﻤﺎُم اﻟَ ْﺤﻮل ِ. َوَﺗ ِﺠ ُﺐ ِﻓﻲ َﻣﺎ ِل اﻟ ﱠﺼ ِﻐﯿ ِﺮ َواﻟ َﻤ ْﺠُﻨﻮن‬
‫ِ .‬ ‫َو ِﻫ َﻲ ِﻓﻲ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴ ِﺔ أَ ْﺷَﯿﺎء َ : َﺳﺎِﺋ َﻤ ُﺔ َﺑ ِﻬﯿ َﻤ ِﺔ ا َﻷْﻧ َﻌﺎِم، َواﻟ َﺨﺎ ِر ُج ِﻣ ْﻦ ا َﻷ ْر ِض، َواﻟ َﻌ َﺴ ُﻞ،‬
‫َوا َﻷْﺛ َﻤﺎ ُن، َو ُﻋ ُﺮو ُض اﻟﱢﺘ َﺠﺎ َرة ِ.‬ ‫َوَﯾ ْﻤَﻨ ُﻊ ُو ُﺟﻮَﺑ َﻬﺎ َدْﯾ ٌﻦ َﯾْﻨُﻘ ُﺺ اﻟﱢﻨ َﺼﺎ َب، َو َﻣ ْﻦ َﻣﺎ َت َو َﻋﻠَْﯿ ِﻪ َز َﻛﺎةٌ أُ ِﺧَﺬ ْت ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺗ ِﺮ َﻛِﺘﻪ َ.‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ِﻓﻲ َﺑ ِﻬﯿ َﻤ ِﺔ ا َﻷْﻧ َﻌﺎِم أَ ْن ُﺗﱠﺘ َﺨَﺬ ﻟِﻠﱠﺪ ﱢر َواﻟﱠﻨ ْﺴ ِﻞ َواﻟﱠﺘ ْﺴ ِﻤﯿ ِﻦ، َﻻ ﻟِْﻠ َﻌ َﻤ ِﻞ، َوأَ ْن ُﺗ ْﺮ َﻋﻰ‬
‫اﻟ ُﻤَﺒﺎ َح أَ ْﻛَﺜ َﺮ اﻟ َﺤ ْﻮ ِل، َوأَ ْن َت ـْﺒﻠُ َﻎ ِﻧ َﺼﺎﺑﺎ ً.‬ ‫َﻓﺄََﻗ ﱡﻞ ِﻧ َﺼﺎ ِب ا ِﻹِﺑ ِﻞ َﺧ ْﻤ ٌﺲ َوِﻓﯿ َﻬﺎ َﺷﺎةٌ، َوِﻓﻲ َﻋ ْﺸ ٍﺮ َﺷﺎَﺗﺎ ِن، َوِﻓﻲ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴ ِﺔ َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮ َﺛَﻼ ُث ِﺷَﯿﺎٍه،‬ ‫َوِﻓﻲ ِﻋ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ َﻦ أَ ْرَﺑ ُﻊ ِﺷَﯿﺎٍه، َوِﻓﻲ َﺧ ْﻤ ٍﺲ َو ِﻋ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ َﻦ ِﺑْﻨ ُﺖ َﻣ َﺨﺎ ٍض، َو ِﻫ َﻲ اﻟﱠِﺘﻲ ﻟَ َﻬﺎ َﺳَﻨٌﺔ، َوِﻓﻲ‬ ‫ِﺳ ﱟﺖ َوَﺛَﻼِﺛﯿ َﻦ ِﺑْﻨ ُﺖ ﻟَُﺒﻮ ٍن، َو ِﻫ َﻲ اﻟﱠِﺘﻲ ﻟَ َﻬﺎ َﺳَﻨَﺘﺎ ِن، َوِﻓﻲ ِﺳ ﱟﺖ َوأَ ْرَﺑ ِﻌﯿ َﻦ ِﺣﱠﻘٌﺔ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ اﻟﱠِﺘﻲ ﻟَ َﻬﺎ‬ ‫َﺛَﻼ ُث ِﺳِﻨﯿ َﻦ، َوِﻓﻲ ِﺳ ﱟﺖ َو َﺳْﺒ ِﻌﯿ َﻦ ِﺑْﻨَﺘﺎ ﻟَُﺒﻮ ٍن، َوِﻓﻲ إِ ْﺣَﺪى َوِﺗ ْﺴ ِﻌﯿ َﻦ ِﺣﱠﻘﺘﺎ ِن، َوِﻓﻲ ِﻣﺎَﺋ ٍﺔ‬ ‫َوإِ ْﺣَﺪى َو ِﻋ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ َﻦ َﺛَﻼ ُث َﺑَﻨﺎ ِت ﻟَُﺒﻮ ٍن، ُﺛﱠﻢ ِﻓﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ أَرَﺑ ِﻌﯿ َﻦ ِﺑْﻨ ُﺖ ﻟَُﺒﻮ ٍن، َوِﻓﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َﺧ ْﻤ ِﺴﯿ َﻦ ِﺣﱠﻘﺔ‬
‫ٌ .‬
‫‪Cattle & Sheep‬‬ ‫.‪The minimum niṣāb for cattle is 30, for which there is a one-year-old bull‬‬ ‫‪For 40, there is a two-year-old cow. For 60, there are two one-year-old‬‬ ‫‪bulls. For every 30 thereafter, there is a one-year-old bull and for every 40,‬‬ ‫.‪there is a two-year-old cow‬‬
‫‪The minimum niṣāb for goats/sheep is 40, for which there is either a one‬‬‫‪year-old kid or a six-month-old lamb. For 121, there are two. For 201,‬‬ ‫‪there are three. For 400, there are four and for every 100 thereafter, there‬‬ ‫.‪is one‬‬
‫.‪Combining of two properties based on its terms, renders them as one‬‬
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوأَﻗَ ﱡﻞ ﻧِ َﺼﺎ ِب اﻟﺒَﻘَ ِﺮ ﺛََﻼﺛُﻮ َن، َوﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ ﺗَﺒِﯿ ٌﻊ َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻣﺎ ﻟَُﻪ َﺳﻨٌَﺔ، َوﻓِﻲ أَ ْرﺑَِﻌﯿ َﻦ ُﻣ ِﺴﻨﱠٌﺔ َو ِﻫ َﻲ اﻟﱠﺘِﻲ ﻟََﻬﺎ َﺳﻨَﺘَﺎ ِن، َوﻓِﻲ‬ ‫ِﺳﺘﱢﯿ َﻦ ﺗَﺒِﯿَﻌﺎ ِن، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﻓِﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ﺛََﻼﺛِﯿ َﻦ ﺗَﺒِﯿ ٌﻊ، َوﻓِﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ أَ ْرﺑَِﻌﯿ َﻦ ُﻣ ِﺴﻨﱠﺔ ٌ. َوأَﻗَ ﱡﻞ ﻧِ َﺼﺎ ِب اﻟَﻐﻨَِﻢ أَ ْرﺑَُﻌﻮ َن، َوﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ‬ ‫َﺷﺎٌة ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟَﻤ ْﻌ ِﺰ ﻟََﻬﺎ َﺳﻨٌَﺔ َوا ِﺣَﺪٌة أَْو َﺟَﺬ َﻋٌﺔ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ ﱠﻀﺄَ ِن ﻟََﻬﺎ ِﺳﺘﱠُﺔ أَ ْﺷُﻬ ٍﺮ، َوﻓِﻲ ِﻣﺎﺋٍَﺔ َوإِ ْﺣَﺪى َو ِﻋ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ َﻦ‬
‫َﺷﺎﺗَﺎ ِن، َوﻓِﻲ ِﻣﺎﺋَـﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ َو َوا ِﺣَﺪٍة ﺛََﻼ ُث ِﺷﯿَﺎٍه، َوﻓِﻲ أَ ْرﺑَِﻌِﻤﺎﺋٍَﺔ أَ ْرﺑَ ُﻊ ِﺷﯿَﺎٍه، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﻓِﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ِﻣﺎﺋَِﺔ َﺷﺎٍة َﺷﺎة ٌ.‬ ‫َواﻟ ُﺨـﻠْ َﻄُﺔ ﺑِ َﺸ ْﺮ ِﻃَﻬﺎ ﺗُ َﺼﯿﱢ ُﺮ اﻟَﻤﺎﻟَْﯿ ِﻦ َﻛﺎﻟَﻤﺎ ِل اﻟ َﻮا ِﺣﺪ ِ.‬

Earthly Yield Zakāt is obligatory upon every measured and stored item such as grains, staple foods, etc. It is obligatory on all grains like wheat, oats, rice, garbanzo beans, swe et peas, lentils, lupines and ervils, along with cotton, flax, basil and cucumber seeds but not for the likes of nutmeg, figs, grapes, or any other fruits like apples, ambarella, pears, etc. with two prerequisites.
The first is to possess the niṣāb, which is five wasqs after filtering the grains and drying the produce [61] .
One wasq [62] equals 60 ṣāʿs [63] . One ṣāʿ equals five and one-third Iraqian pounds [64] which is equivalent to 342 and six-sevenths Damascan pounds [65] .
The second is possession at the time of liability, i.e. when grains harden and produce ripens. It is not determined until they are placed on the threshing floor, etc.
One-tenth is obligatory for what has been effortlessly irrigated, one-half of that for what was irrigated with effort, and three-quarters of it for what was irrigated with a combination of the two [66] . If they are equal, consideration is given to the method which yielded the greatest benefit and growth; if it is unknown, one-tenth is due.
Both the one-tenth and land tax are combined for taxable land, i.e. that which has been forcibly conquered and has not been divided among those who are due spoils ( besides Makkah) like Egypt, the Levant, and Iraq.
One-tenth of honey is due, regardless if it was taken from uncultivated or owned land. Its niṣāb is 160 Iraqian pounds [67] .
Whoever extracts the niṣāb of minerals (after smelting and purification) is obliged to give two and one-half percent immediately. One-fifth of rikāz i.e. buried treasure, even if scant, is due and is to be treated like fayʾ [68] . Its obligatory payment is not voided by a debt and the remainder belongs to its finder (even if they are an employee), so long as they are not hired to search for it.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ اﻟ ﱠﺰَﻛﺎُة ﻓِﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َﻣِﻜﯿ ٍﻞ ُﻣﱠﺪ َﺧ ٍﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺣﺒﱠٍﺔ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻗُﻮ ِت اﻟﺒَﻠَِﺪ َو َﻏْﯿ ِﺮه ِ.‬
‫ﻓَﺘَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﻓِﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ اﻟ ُﺤﺒُﻮ ِب َﻛﺎﻟ ِﺤْﻨ َﻄِﺔ، َواﻟ ﱠﺸِﻌﯿ ِﺮ، َواﻷَ ُر ﱢز، َواﻟ ِﺤﱠﻤ ِﺺ، َواﻟ ُﺠﻠُﺒﱠﺎ َن، َواﻟَﻌَﺪ ِس، واﻟﺘﱡ ْﺮُﻣ ِﺲ،‬ ‫َواﻟِﻜ ْﺮ َﺳﻨَِﺔ، َوﺑِ ْﺰ ِر اﻟﻘُ ْﻄ ِﻦ َواﻟَﻜﺘﱠﺎ ِن، َوﺑِ ْﺰ ِر اﻟ ﱠﺮﯾَﺎ ِﺣﯿ َﻦ واﻟﻘِﺜﱠﺎِء، َﻻ ﻓِﻲ ﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮ َﺟ ْﻮ ٍز َوﺗِﯿ ٍﻦ َو ُﻋﻨﱠﺎ ٍب، َوَﻻ ﻓِﻲ‬
‫ﺑَﻘِﯿﱠِﺔ اﻟﻔَ َﻮاِﻛَﻪ َﻛﺘُﻔﱠﺎ ٍح َوإِ ﱠﺟﺎ ٍص وُﻛﱠﻤْﺜ َﺮى َوﻧ ْﺤ ِﻮ َذﻟِ َﻚ، ﺑِ َﺸ ْﺮ َﻃْﯿﻦ ِ:‬ ‫أَ َﺣُﺪ ُﻫَﻢ ا : أَ ْن ﯾَْﺒﻠَُﻎ ﻧِ َﺼﺎﺑﺎً َوﻗَْﺪ ُرُه - ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﺗَ ْﺼﻔِﯿَِﺔ َﺣ ﱟﺐ َو َﺟﻔَﺎ ِف ﺛََﻤﺮ ٍ- َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴُﺔ أَْو ُﺳ ٍﻖ، َواﻟ َﻮ ْﺳ ُﻖ ِﺳﺘﱡﻮ َن‬ ‫َﺻﺎﻋﺎً، َواﻟ ﱠﺼﺎ ُع َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴُﺔ أَ ْر َﻃﺎ ٍل َوﺛُﻠُ ٌﺚ ﺑِﺎﻟِﻌ َﺮاﻗِ ﱢﻲ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ ﺛََﻼﺛُِﻤﺎﺋٍَﺔ َواْﺛـﻨَﺎ ِن َوأَ ْرﺑَُﻌﻮ َن ِر ْﻃ ًﻼ َو ِﺳﺘﱠُﺔ أَ ْﺳﺒَﺎ ِع‬
‫ِر ْﻃ ٍﻞ ﺑِﺎﻟﱢﺪَﻣ ْﺸﻘِ ّﻲ ِ.‬ ‫اﻟﺜﱠﺎ ِن ي : ُﻣﻠُْﻜُﻪ َوْﻗ َﺖ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑَِﻬﺎ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺐ ا ْﺷﺘَِﺪاُدُه، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟﺜﱠَﻤ ِﺮ ﺑُُﺪ ﱡو َﺻَﻼ ِﺣِﻪ، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ْﺴﺘَﻘِ ﱡﺮ إِﱠﻻ ﻓِﻲ‬
‫َﺟ ْﻌﻠَِﻬﺎ ﻓِﻲ ﺑَْﯿَﺪ ٍر َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮه ِ.‬ ‫وﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ اﻟُﻌ ُﺸ ُﺮ ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ُﺳﻘِ َﻲ ﺑَِﻼ ُﻛﻠْﻔٍَﺔ، َوﻧِ ْﺼﻔُُﻪ ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ُﺳﻘِ َﻲ ﺑَِﻬﺎ، َوﺛََﻼﺛَُﺔ أَ ْرﺑَﺎ ِﻋِﻪ ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ُﺳﻘِ َﻲ ﺑِِﻬَﻤﺎ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﺗَﻔَﺎ َوﺗَﺎ‬
‫ا ْﻋﺘُﺒِ َﺮ اﻷَ ْﻛﺜَ ُﺮ ﻧَْﻔﻌﺎً َوﻧُﻤ ‪‬ﻮا، َوَﻣ َﻊ اﻟ َﺠ ْﻬ ِﻞ اﻟُﻌ ْﺸﺮ ُ.‬ ‫َوﯾَ ْﺠﺘَِﻤ ُﻊ ُﻋ ْﺸ ٌﺮ َو َﺧ َﺮا ٌج ﻓِﻲ أَ ْر ٍض َﺧ َﺮا ِﺟﯿﱠٍﺔ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ َﻣﺎ ﻓُﺘِ َﺤ ْﺖ َﻋْﻨ َﻮًة، َوﻟَْﻢ ﺗُﻘَ ﱠﺴْﻢ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟَﻐﺎﻧِِﻤﯿ َﻦ َﻏْﯿ َﺮ َﻣﱠﻜَﺔ‬
‫َﻛِﻤ ْﺼ ٍﺮ َواﻟ ﱠﺸﺎِم َواﻟِﻌ َﺮاق ِ.‬ ‫َوﻓِﻲ اﻟَﻌ َﺴ ِﻞ اﻟُﻌ ْﺸ ُﺮ َﺳ َﻮاٌء أَ َﺧَﺬُه ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣ َﻮا ٍت أَْو َﻣ ْﻤﻠُﻮَﻛٍﺔ، َوﻧِ َﺼﺎﺑُُﻪ ِﻣﺎﺋٌَﺔ َو ِﺳﺘﱡﻮ َن ِر ْﻃ ًﻼ ِﻋ َﺮاﻗِﯿﱠﺔ ً.‬ ‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ ا ْﺳﺘَ ْﺨ َﺮ َج ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣ ْﻌِﺪ ٍن ﻧِ َﺼﺎﺑﺎً ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َﺳْﺒ ٍﻚ َوﺗَ ْﺼﻔَﯿﱠٍﺔ ﻓَﻔِﯿِﻪ ُرْﺑ ُﻊ اﻟُﻌ ْﺸ ِﺮ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ َﺤﺎ ِل، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱢﺮَﻛﺎ ِز َو ُﻫ َﻮ‬ ‫اﻟَﻜْﻨ ُﺰ َوﻟَْﻮ ﻗَﻠِﯿ ًﻼ اﻟ ُﺨ ْﻤ ُﺲ، ﯾُ ْﺼ َﺮ ُف َﻣ ْﺼ ِﺮ َف اﻟﻔَ ْﻲِء، َوَﻻ ﯾَـ ْﻤﻨَ ُﻊ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑِِﻪ َدْﯾ ٌﻦ، َوﺑَﺎﻗِﯿِﻪ ﻟَِﻮا ِﺟِﺪِه َوﻟَْﻮ‬
‫أَ ِﺟﯿﺮاً َﻻ ﻟِ َﻄﻠَﺒِﻪ ِ.‬
‫‪Gold & Silver‬‬ ‫‪Two and one-half percent of gold and silver must be paid if they reach the‬‬ ‫‪niṣāb i.e. 20 mithqāls [69] for gold and 200 dirhams for silver [70] . They can‬‬ ‫‪be combined to complete the niṣāb. The value of merchandise can also be‬‬ ‫.‪combined to one, or both, as well‬‬ ‫‪There is no zakāt due on permissible jewelry intended for usage or lending‬‬ ‫‪(even for whom it is impermissible) so long as they are not trying to avoid‬‬ ‫‪payment. It is obl igatory on [jewelry] that is impermissible, has been‬‬ ‫‪allocated to rent, or has been prepared for expenditure if it reaches the‬‬ ‫.‪niṣāb‬‬ ‫‪It is impermissible to adorn the masjid and miḥrāb [71] , as well as to plate‬‬ ‫‪the roof or walls, with gold or silver. It is obligatory to remove it and pay‬‬ ‫.‪its zakāt, unless it is worn away and none of it can be collected‬‬

It is permissible for a male to have a silver ring, which is best worn on the left pinky finger. It can be made from more than a mithqāl (so long as it is not customarily excessive), as can a sword’s pommel, belt’s décor, armor, and helmet; not stirrups, reins, or an inkwell etc. It is permissible to have a golden sword’s pommel and whatever else is necessary. It is permitted for women to have whatever is customary to wear, even if it exceeds 1000 mithqāls. It is also allowed for men and women to wear jewelry made from the likes of gems and jewels. For-profit sales merchandise is appraised at what would be more advantageous to the poor; either gold or silver.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﻓِﻲ اﻟﱠﺬ َﻫ ِﺐ َواﻟﻔِ ﱠﻀِﺔ ُرْﺑ ُﻊ اﻟُﻌ ْﺸ ِﺮ إَِذا ﺑَﻠََﻐﺎ ﻧِ َﺼﺎﺑﺎً، ﻓَﻨِ َﺼﺎ ُب َذ َﻫ ٍﺐ ِﻋ ْﺸ ُﺮو َن ِﻣْﺜﻘَﺎﻻً، َوﻓِ ﱠﻀٍﺔ ِﻣﺎﺋَـﺘَﺎ‬ ‫ِد ْر َﻫٍﻢ، َوﯾَ ُﻀﱡﻢ أَ َﺣُﺪ ُﻫَﻤﺎ إِﻟَﻰ اﻵ َﺧ ِﺮ ﻓِﻲ ﺗَـ ْﻜِﻤﯿ ِﻞ اﻟﻨﱢ َﺼﺎ ِب، َوﺗُ َﻀﱡﻢ ﻗِﯿَﻤُﺔ َﻋ ْﺮ ِض ﺗِ َﺠﺎ َرٍة إَﻟَﻰ أَ َﺣِﺪ َذﻟِ َﻚ، َوإِﻟَﻰ‬
.ِ ‫َﺟِﻤﯿِﻌﻪ‬ .ٍ ‫َوَﻻ َزَﻛﺎَة ﻓِﻲ ُﺣﻠِ ﱟﻲ ُﻣﺒَﺎ ٍح ُﻣَﻌﱟﺪ ﻟِِْﻼ ْﺳﺘِ ْﻌَﻤﺎ ِل أَْو إِ َﻋﺎ َرٍة، َوﻟَْﻮ ﻟَِﻤ ْﻦ ﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ، َﻏْﯿ َﺮ ﻓﺎ ﱟر ِﻣ ْﻦ َزَﻛﺎة‬
.ً ‫وﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﻓﻲ ُﻣ َﺤ ﱠﺮٍم، وُﻣَﻌﱟﺪ ﻟِﻠَْﻜ ْﺮ ِي أَْو اﻟﻨﱠﻔَﻘَِﺔ إَِذا ﺑَﻠََﻎ ﻧِ َﺼﺎﺑﺎ‬ ‫َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم أَ ْن ﯾُ َﺤﻠﱠﻰ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠٌﺪ أَْو ِﻣ ْﺤ َﺮا ٌب أَْو ﯾَُﻤ ﱠﻮَه َﺳْﻘ ٌﻒ أَْو َﺣﺎﺋِ ٌﻂ ﺑِﻨَْﻘٍﺪ، وﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ إَِزاﻟَﺘُُﻪ َو َزَﻛﺎﺗُُﻪ إِﱠﻻ إَِذا‬
. ‫ا ْﺳﺘُ ْﻬﻠِ َﻚ َوﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺠﺘَِﻤ ْﻊ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ َﺷ ْﻲٌء ﻓِﯿِﻬَﻢ ا‬ ‫ﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ﻟَِﺬَﻛ ٍﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻓِ ﱠﻀٍﺔ َﺧﺎﺗٌَﻢ، َوﻟُْﺒ ُﺴُﻪ ﺑِ ِﺨْﻨ َﺼ ِﺮ ﯾَ َﺴﺎ ٍر أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ، َوَﻻ ﺑَْﺄ َس ﺑِ َﺠ ْﻌﻠِِﻪ أَْﻛﺜَ َﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ ِﻣْﺜﻘَﺎ ٍل َﻣﺎ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﺮ ْج‬
.َ ‫َﻋ ْﻦ اﻟَﻌﺎَدِة، َوﻗَﺒِﯿَﻌُﺔ َﺳْﯿ ٍﻒ، َو ِﺣﻠْﯿَُﺔ ِﻣْﻨ َﻄﻘٍَﺔ، َو َﺟ ْﻮ َﺷ ٌﻦ، َو ُﺧﻮَذٌة، َﻻ ِرَﻛﺎ ٌب َوﻟِ َﺠﺎٌم َوَد َواٌة َوﻧَ ْﺤ ُﻮ َذﻟِﻚ‬ ‫َوﯾُﺒَﺎ ُح ِﻣ ْﻦ َذ َﻫ ٍﺐ ﻗَﺒِﯿَﻌُﺔ َﺳْﯿ ٍﻒ، َوَﻣﺎ َد َﻋ ْﺖ إِﻟَْﯿِﻪ َﺿ ُﺮو َرٌة، َوﻟِﻨَ َﺴﺎٍء َﻣﺎ َﺟ َﺮ ْت َﻋﺎَدﺗُُﻬ ﱠﻦ ﺑِﻠُْﺒ ِﺴِﻪ َوﻟَْﻮ َزاَد َﻋﻠَﻰ‬
.ٍ ‫أَﻟْ ِﻒ ِﻣْﺜﻘَﺎ ٍل، َوﻟِﻠ ﱠﺮ ُﺟ ِﻞ َواﻟَﻤ ْﺮأَِة اﻟﺘﱠ َﺤﻠِﻲ ﺑِﻨَ ْﺤ ِﻮ َﺟ ْﻮ َﻫ ٍﺮ َوﯾَﺎﻗُﻮت‬ .ٍ ‫َوﯾُﻘَ ﱠﻮُم َﻋ ْﺮ ُض اﻟﺘﱢ َﺠﺎ َرِة، َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻣﺎ ﯾَُﻌﱡﺪ ﻟِﻠْﺒَْﯿ ِﻊ َواﻟ ﱢﺸ َﺮاِء ِﻷَ ْﺟ ِﻞ اﻟ ﱢﺮْﺑ ِﺢ ﺑِﺎﻷَ َﺣ ﱢﻆ ﻟِﻠْﻔُﻘَ َﺮاِء ِﻣ ْﻦ َذ َﻫ ٍﺐ َوﻓِ ﱠﻀﺔ‬
Fiṭr Zakāt al-Fitṛ is an obligatory charity at the commencement of Ramaḍān’s Fitṛ [72] . It is a designated obligation, distributed like zakāt, and its obligatory nature is not forgone due to a debt unless it is demanded. It is obligatory upon every Muslim to pay for themselves and on behalf of every Muslim under their care (so long as it is in addition to their obligatory spending of both the night and day of ʿEid, what is required of living quarters, servants, transports, books of knowledge needed to read

and master, and daily clothing, etc.). If there is not enough for everyone, he should begin with himself then his wife, his bondservant, his mother, his father, his child and then those closest related in inheritance. It is recommended to give it on behalf of a fetus. It becomes obligatory at sunset on the night of ʿEid al-Fitṛ, is permissible before it by two days, preferable on the same day before the prayer, disliked for the remainder of the day, impermissible to delay after it, and is obligatory to make up. It consists of one ṣāʿ of wheat, barley, dates, raisins, or dried yogurt. The best is dates, then raisins, then wheat, and then the most beneficial. If those are unavailable, any storable grain will suffice. It is permissible for a group to give their Fitṛ to an individual and vice versa.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َو َزَﻛﺎُة اﻟﻔِ ْﻄ ِﺮ َﺻَﺪﻗٌَﺔ َوا ِﺟﺒٌَﺔ ﺑِﺎﻟﻔِ ْﻄ ِﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن، َوﺗُ َﺴﱠﻤﻰ ﻓَ ْﺮﺿﺎً، َوَﻣ ْﺼ َﺮﻓَُﻬﺎ َﻛ َﺰَﻛﺎٍة، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ْﻤﻨَ ُﻊ‬ ،‫ُو ُﺟﻮﺑََﻬﺎ َدْﯾ ٌﻦ إِﱠﻻ َﻣ َﻊ َﻃﻠَﺐ ٍ. َوﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ إَِذا َﻛﺎﻧَ ْﺖ ﻓَﺎ ِﺿﻠًَﺔ َﻋ ْﻦ ﻧَﻔَﻘٍَﺔ َوا ِﺟﺒٍَﺔ ﯾَ ْﻮَم اﻟِﻌْﯿِﺪ َوﻟَْﯿﻠَﺘَُﻪ‬ ‫َوَﻣﺎ ﯾَ ْﺤﺘَﺎ ُﺟُﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣ ْﺴَﻜ ٍﻦ َو َﺧﺎِدٍم َوَداﺑﱠٍﺔ، َوُﻛﺘُ ِﺐ ِﻋﻠٍْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺤﺘَﺎ ُﺟَﻬﺎ ﻟِﻨَ َﻈ ٍﺮ َو ِﺣْﻔ ٍﻆ، َوﺛِﯿَﺎ ِب ﺑَْﺬﻟٍَﺔ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه، ﻓَﯿُ ْﺨ ِﺮ ُج‬ ‫َﻋ ْﻦ ﻧَْﻔ ِﺴِﻪ، َو َﻋ ْﻦ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ ﯾَُﻤﻮﻧُُﻪ؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺠْﺪ ﻟِ َﺠِﻤﯿِﻌِﻬْﻢ ﺑََﺪأَ ﺑِﻨَْﻔ ِﺴِﻪ ﻓَ َﺰ ْو َﺟﺘِِﻪ ﻓَ َﺮﻗِﯿﻘِِﻪ، ﻓَﺄُﱢﻣِﻪ ﻓَﺄَﺑِﯿِﻪ، ﻓَ َﻮﻟَِﺪِه‬
.ٍ ‫ﻓَﺄَْﻗ َﺮ َب ﻓِﻲ اﻟِﻤﯿ َﺮاث ِ. َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﻋ ْﻦ َﺟﻨِﯿﻦ‬ ‫َوﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﺑُِﻐ ُﺮو ِب َﺷ ْﻤ ِﺲ ﻟَْﯿﻠَِﺔ ِﻋْﯿِﺪ اﻟﻔِ ْﻄ ِﺮ، َوﺗَ ُﺠﻮ ُز ﻗَْﺒﻠَُﻪ ﺑِﯿَ ْﻮَﻣْﯿ ِﻦ ﻓَﻘَ ْﻂ، َوﯾَ ْﻮَﻣُﻪ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼِة أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ، َوﺗُﻜ َﺮُه‬ ‫ﻓِﻲ ﺑَﺎﻗِﯿِﻪ، َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم ﺗَْﺄ ِﺧﯿ ُﺮ َﻫﺎ َﻋْﻨُﻪ، َوﺗُْﻘ َﻀﻰ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑﺎً، َو ِﻫ َﻲ َﺻﺎ ٌع ِﻣ ْﻦ ﺑُ ﱟﺮ أَْو َﺷِﻌﯿ ٍﺮ أَْو ﺗَ ْﻤ ٍﺮ أَْو َزﺑِﯿ ٍﺐ أَْو‬ ‫أَﻗِ ٍﻂ، َواﻷَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ﺗَ ْﻤ ٌﺮ ﻓَ َﺰﺑِﯿ ٌﺐ ﻓَﺒُ ﱞﺮ ﻓَﺄَْﻧﻔَ ُﻊ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ُﻋِﺪَﻣ ْﺖ أَ ْﺟ َﺰأَ ُﻛ ﱡﻞ َﺣ ﱟﺐ ﯾُْﻘﺘَﺎ ُت، وﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز أَ ْن ﺗُ ْﻌ ِﻄ َﻲ اﻟ َﺠَﻤﺎ َﻋُﺔ‬
.ُ ‫ﻓِ ْﻄ َﺮﺗَُﻬْﻢ ﻟَِﻮا ِﺣٍﺪ َو َﻋ ْﻜ ُﺴﻪ‬
Distribution It is obligatory to distribute zakāt immediately , i f possible , just like an oath or an expiation. It is, however, possible to delay it due to an excuse. Whoever knowingly denies it, even if they distribute it, has committed apostasy. Whoever withholds it, due to stinginess or negligence, will have it taken and whoever knows the impermissibility of such will be penalized. The guardian of the young and mentally ill is required to distribute it on their behalf; the prerequisite of which is the presence of an intention, just like for his own wealth. It is recommended to publicize it and impermissible, but will suffice, to deliver it beyond the distance of shortening in the presence of its recipients. If the one upon whom zakāt is

obligatory is in one land and their wealth is in another, it should be distributed in the land in which it is; their fitṛ, and that of those who are a financial responsibility, is to be distributed in their land. It is permissible to prepay it for no more than two years if the niṣāb is met and not from it for the two years [73] . It is only payed to eight categories which are: the poor; the impoverished; those working for the zakāt fund; to soften the hearts; manumission of bondservants; the debtor; in the way of Allāh; and the wayfarer. It is permissible to limit it to one of the categories and recommended to give it to relatives who are not a financial responsibility. It is permissible for the eligible to ask for it. It is obligatory to accept lawful wealth given without asking for or desiring it. If someone capable of earning a livelihood becomes solely dedicated to seeking Islamic knowledge (not mere worship) and is unable to balance both their livelihood and studies, they are to be given what they need of zakat, even if that knowledge is not required of them.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ إِ ْﺧ َﺮا ُج اﻟ ﱠﺰَﻛﺎِة ﻓَ ْﻮراً َﻛﻨَْﺬ ٍر َوَﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرٍة إِ ْن أَْﻣَﻜ َﻦ، َوﻟَُﻪ ﺗَْﺄ ِﺧﯿ ٌﺮ ﻟُِﻌْﺬ ٍر، َوَﻣ ْﻦ َﺟ َﺤَﺪ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑََﻬﺎ َﻋﺎﻟِﻤﺎً َﻛﻔَ َﺮ‬ ‫َوﻟَْﻮ أَ ْﺧ َﺮ َﺟَﻬﺎ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ َﻣﻨََﻌَﻬﺎ ﺑُ ْﺨ ًﻼ أَْو ﺗََﻬﺎ ُوﻧﺎً أُ ِﺧَﺬ ْت ِﻣْﻨُﻪ َو ُﻋ ﱢﺰ َر َﻣ ْﻦ َﻋﻠَِﻢ ﺗَ ْﺤ ِﺮﯾَﻢ َذﻟِ َﻚ، َوﯾَﻠْ َﺰُم أَ ْن ﯾُ ْﺨ ِﺮ َج‬ ‫َﻋ ْﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺼِﻐﯿ ِﺮ َواﻟَﻤ ْﺠﻨَﻮ ِن َوﻟِﯿﱡُﻬَﻤﺎ، َو ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ﻟَُﻪ ﻧِﯿﱠٌﺔ َﻛَﻤﺎﻟِِﻪ، َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ إِ ْﻇَﻬﺎ ٌر، َو َﺣ ُﺮَم ﻧَْﻘﻠَُﻬﺎ إِﻟَﻰ َﻣ َﺴﺎﻓَِﺔ ﻗَ ْﺼ ٍﺮ إِ ْن‬ ‫ُو ِﺟَﺪ أَْﻫﻠَُﻬﺎ َوﺗُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ، َوإِ ْن َﻛﺎ َن اﻟُﻤ َﺰﱢﻛ ﱡﻲ ﻓِﻲ ﺑَﻠٍَﺪ َوَﻣﺎﻟُُﻪ ﻓِﻲ آ َﺧ ٍﺮ أَ ْﺧ َﺮ َج َزَﻛﺎَة اﻟَﻤﺎ ِل ﻓِﻲ ﺑَﻠَِﺪ اﻟَﻤﺎ ِل، َوأَ ْﺧ َﺮ َج‬ ‫ﻓِ ْﻄ َﺮﺗَُﻪ َوﻓِ ْﻄ َﺮَة َﻣ ْﻦ ﻟَِﺰَﻣْﺘُﻪ ﻓِﻲ ﺑَﻠَِﺪ ﻧَْﻔ ِﺴِﻪ، َوﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز ﺗَ ْﻌ ِﺠﯿﻠَُﻬﺎ ﻟِ َﺤ ْﻮﻟَْﯿ ِﻦ ﻓَﻘَ ْﻂ إَِذا َﻛُﻤ َﻞ اﻟﻨﱢ َﺼﺎ ُب َﻻ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ ﻟِﻠ َﺤ ْﻮﻟَْﯿﻦ‬
. ِ ،‫َوَﻻ ﺗُْﺪﻓَ ُﻊ إِﱠﻻ إِﻟَﻰ اﻷَ ْﺻﻨَﺎ ِف اﻟﺜﱠَﻤﺎﻧِﯿَِﺔ َو ُﻫﻢ ْ : اﻟﻔُﻘَ َﺮاُء، َواﻟَﻤ َﺴﺎِﻛﯿ ُﻦ، َواﻟَﻌﺎِﻣﻠُﻮ َن َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ، َواﻟُﻤ َﺆﻟﱠﻔَُﺔ ﻗُﻠُﻮﺑُُﻬْﻢ‬
.ِ ‫َوﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱢﺮﻗَﺎ ِب، َواﻟَﻐﺎ ِرُﻣﻮ َن، َوﻓِﻲ َﺳﺒِﯿ ِﻞ ا ﱠﷲِ، َواْﺑ ِﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺴﺒِﯿﻞ‬ ‫َوﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز اﻻْﻗﺘِ َﺼﺎ ُر َﻋﻠَﻰ َوا ِﺣٍﺪ ِﻣ ْﻦ ِﺻْﻨ ٍﻒ، َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ إِﻟَﻰ َﻣ ْﻦ َﻻ ﺗَﻠْ َﺰُﻣُﻪ ُﻣ ْﺆﻧَﺘُُﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ أَﻗَﺎ ِرﺑِِﻪ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ أُﺑِﯿ َﺢ ﻟَُﻪ‬
.ُ ‫أَ ْﺧُﺬ َﺷ ْﻲٍء أُﺑِﯿ ُﺢ ﻟَُﻪ ُﺳ َﺆاﻟُﻪ‬ ‫َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﻗَﺒُﻮ ُل َﻣﺎ ٍل َﻃﯿﱠ ٍﺐ أَﺗَﻰ ﺑَِﻼ َﻣ ْﺴﺄَﻟٍَﺔ َوَﻻ ا ْﺳﺘِ ْﺸ َﺮا ِف ﻧَْﻔ ٍﺲ، َوإِ ْن ﺗَﻔَ ﱠﺮ َغ ﻗَﺎِد ٌر َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟﺘﱠَﻜ ﱡﺴ ِﺐ ﻟِﻠِْﻌﻠِﻢ‬ ‫اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﺮ ِﻋ ﱢﻲ َﻻ ﻟِﻠِْﻌﺒَﺎَدِة َوﺗََﻌﱠﺬ َر اﻟ َﺠ ْﻤ ُﻊ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟﺘﱠَﻜ ﱡﺴ ِﺐ َواﻻِ ْﺷﺘَِﻐﺎ ِل ﺑِﺎﻟِﻌﻠِْﻢ أُ ْﻋ ِﻄ َﻲ ِﻣ ْﻦ َزَﻛﺎٍة ﻟِ َﺤﺎ َﺟﺘِِﻪ؛ َوإِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ‬
.ُ ‫ﯾُِﻜ ْﻦ اﻟَﻌﻠُْﻢ َﻻ ِزﻣﺎً ﻟَﻪ‬
Charity

It is not sufficient to distribute it to the following: a non-believer (other than seeking to soften their heart); a bondservant (other than one working independently or buying freedom); both the poor and impoverished who find sufficiency in obligatory spending; and banī Hāshim, i.e. his progeny (peace be upon him), or their freed bondservants.
If it is unknowingly distributed to other than the deserving, and such a condition is later known, it will not suffice except for someone wealthy assumed to be poor.
Voluntary charity is always recommended. It is better if done secretly; in goodwill; while healthy; in Ramaḍān; in a time of need; during every virtuous time; in every virtuous place; and given to a neighbor or relative especially while feuding , which is then considered charity and joining the ties of kinship. To make a reminder of charity is a major sin, which nullifies its reward.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ َدْﻓُﻌَﻬﺎ إِﻟَﻰ َﻛﺎﻓِ ٍﺮ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ُﻣ َﺆﻟﱠ ٍﻒ، َوَﻻ إِﻟَﻰ َﻛﺎِﻣ ِﻞ ِر ﱟق َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﻋﺎِﻣ ٍﻞ َوَﻣَﻜﺎﺗَ ٍﺐ، َوَﻻ إِﻟَﻰ ﻓَﻘِﯿ ٍﺮ‬
،‫َوِﻣ ْﺴِﻜﯿ ٍﻦ ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَ ْﻐﻨِﯿَْﯿ ِﻦ ﺑِﻨَﻔَﻘٍَﺔ َوا ِﺟﺒٍَﺔ، َوَﻻ ﻟِﺒَﻨِﻲ َﻫﺎ ِﺷٍﻢ ُو ُﻫْﻢ ُﺳَﻼﻟَﺘُُﻪ، َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ، َوَﻻ َﻣ َﻮاﻟِﯿِﻬْﻢ‬ .ً ‫َوإِ ْن َدﻓََﻌَﻬﺎ ﻟَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮ ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَ ِﺤﻘﱢَﻬﺎ ﻟِ َﺠ ْﻬ ٍﻞ ﺛُﱠﻢ َﻋﻠَِﻢ َﺣﺎﻟَُﻪ ﻟَْﻢ ﺗُ ْﺠ ِﺰْﺋُﻪ إَﱠﻻ ﻟَِﻐﻨِ ﱟﻲ َﻇﻨﱠُﻪ ﻓَﻘِﯿﺮا‬
‫ﺮا ﺑِ ِﻄﯿ ِﺐ ﻧَْﻔ ٍﺲ ﻓِﻲ ِﺻ ﱠﺤٍﺔ، َو َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن، َو َوْﻗ ِﺖ َﺣﺎ َﺟٍﺔ، َوﻓِﻲ‬ ‫َوﺗُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺻَﺪﻗَُﺔ اﻟﺘﱠ َﻄ ﱡﻮ ِع ُﻛ ﱠﻞ َوْﻗ ٍﺖ، َوَﻛﻮﻧَُﻬﺎ ِﺳ‬ ،‫ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َزَﻣﺎ ٍن َوَﻣَﻜﺎ ٍن ﻓَﺎ ِﺿ ٍﻞ، َو َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺟﺎ ٍر َوَذ ِوي َر ِﺣٍﻢ َﻻ ِﺳﯿﱠَﻤﺎ َﻣ َﻊ َﻋَﺪا َوٍة، َو ِﻫ َﻲ َﺻَﺪﻗٌَﺔ َو ِﺻﻠٌَﺔ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ‬
.ِ ‫َواﻟَﻤ ﱡﻦ ﺑِﺎﻟ ﱠﺼَﺪﻗَِﺔ َﻛﺒِﯿ َﺮٌة َوﯾَْﺒ ُﻄ ُﻞ اﻟﺜﱠ َﻮا ُب ﺑِﻪ‬
Fasting It is to intentionally refrain from specific things during a specific time.
The fast of Ramaḍān [74] becomes obligatory with the sighting of the crescent moon. If it is not sighted in the clear night sky on the 30th of Shaʿbān [75] , fasting is not commenced. If, however, its place of rising is obstructed by clouds, dust, etc., it is obligatory to fast with the intention of Ramaḍān as an assumed precautionary ruling , which will suffice if it becomes apparent. The rulings of fasting, tarāwīḥ, and the obligatory expiation for intercourse during it, etc. all apply, so long as it has not been proven to be a day of Shaʿbān. The remaining rulings, such as divorce and manumission of bondservants, do not apply. The crescent, which is visible during the day, is for the following night.

If its sighting is confirmed in one area, everyone else is required to fast. If it is confirmed in the day, it must be fasted and then made up. It, alone, is accepted by one who is of legal capacity and upright; even if by a bondservant or a woman or given without the wording of testimony. It is not restricted to the ruler, and all the remaining rulings apply. Whoever sights it for Shawwāl [76] alone, is not to break the fast, but if they sight it alone for Ramaḍān, and their testimony is rejected, they are required to fast. All the rulings of the month, including divorce, and manumission of bondservants, etc., apply.
‫ِﻛﺘَﺎُب اﻟ ﱢﺼﯿَﺎِم‬ .ٍ ‫َو ُﻫ َﻮ إِْﻣ َﺴﺎ ٌك ﺑَﻨِﯿﱠٍﺔ َﻋ ْﻦ أَ ْﺷﯿَﺎَء َﻣ ْﺨ ُﺼﻮ َﺻٍﺔ ﻓِﻲ َزَﻣ ٍﻦ َﻣ ْﺨ ُﺼﻮص‬ ‫َو َﺻﻮُم َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن ﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﺑِ ُﺮ ْؤﯾَِﺔ ِﻫَﻼﻟِِﻪ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾُ َﺮ َﻣ َﻊ َﺻ ْﺤ ِﻮ ﻟَْﯿﻠَِﺔ اﻟﺜﱠَﻼﺛِﯿ َﻦ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﻌﺒَﺎ َن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ُﺼﻮُﻣﻮا، َوإِ ْن‬ ‫ﺎ ا ْﺣﺘِﯿَﺎﻃﺎً ﺑِﻨِﯿﱠِﺔ َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن، َوﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ‬‫َﺣﺎ َل ُدو َن َﻣ ْﻄﻠَِﻌِﻪ َﻏْﯿٌﻢ أَْو ﻗَﺘَ ٌﺮ أَْو َﻏْﯿ ُﺮ ُﻫَﻤﺎ َو َﺟ َﺐ ِﺻﯿَﺎُﻣُﻪ ُﺣ ْﻜﻤﺎً َﻇﻨﱢﯿ‬ ‫إِ ْن َﻇَﻬ َﺮ ِﻣْﻨﻪ ُ. َوﺗُْﺜﺒَ ُﺖ أَ ْﺣَﻜﺎُم اﻟ ﱠﺼ ْﻮِم ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺻَﻼِة ﺗَ َﺮا ِوﯾ َﺢ، َو ُو ُﺟﻮ ِب َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرٍة ﺑِ َﻮ ْطٍء ﻓِﯿِﻪ َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه َﻣﺎ ﻟَْﻢ‬ ‫ﯾَﺘَﺤﻘﱠ ُﻖ أَﻧﱠُﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﻌﺒَﺎ َن، َوَﻻ ﺗُْﺜﺒَ ُﺖ ﺑَﻘِﯿﱠُﺔ اﻷَ ْﺣَﻜﺎِم ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻧﺤ ِﻮ َﻃَﻼ ٍق َو ِﻋﺘَﺎ ٍق، َواﻟِﻬَﻼ ُل اﻟَﻤ ْﺮﺋِ ﱡﻲ ﻧََﻬﺎراً ﻟِﻠَْﯿﻠَِﺔ‬
.ِ ‫اﻟُﻤْﻘﺒِﻠَﺔ‬ ‫َوإَِذا ﺛَﺒَﺘَ ْﺖ ُر ْؤﯾَﺘُُﻪ ﺑِﺒَﻠٍَﺪ ﻟَِﺰَم اﻟ ﱠﺼ ْﻮُم َﺟِﻤﯿ َﻊ اﻟﻨﱠﺎ ِس، َوإِ ْن ﺛَﺒَﺘَ ْﺖ ﻧََﻬﺎراً أَْﻣ َﺴُﻜﻮا َوﻗَ َﻀ ْﻮا، َوﯾُْﻘﺒِ ُﻞ ﻓِﯿِﻪ َو ْﺣَﺪُه‬ ِ ‫َﺧﺒَ ُﺮ ُﻣَﻜﻠﱠ ٍﻒ َﻋْﺪ ٍل، َوﻟَْﻮ َﻋْﺒﺪاً أَْو أُْﻧﺜَﻰ أَْو ﺑُِﺪو ِن ﻟَْﻔ ِﻆ اﻟ ﱠﺸَﻬﺎَدِة، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ْﺨﺘَ ﱡﺺ ﺑِ َﺤﺎِﻛٍﻢ، َوﺗُْﺜﺒَ ُﺖ ﺑَﻘَﯿﱠُﺔ اﻷَ ْﺣَﻜﺎم‬
. ‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ َرآُه َو ْﺣَﺪُه ﻟِ َﺸ ﱠﻮا ٍل ﻟَْﻢ ﯾُْﻔ ِﻄ ْﺮ، َوﻟَِﺮَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن َو ُرﱠد ْت َﺷَﻬﺎَدﺗُُﻪ ﻟَِﺰَﻣُﻪ اﻟ ﱠﺼﻮُم َو َﺟِﻤﯿ ُﻊ أَ ْﺣَﻜﺎِم اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﻬ ِﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ‬
. ‫َﻃَﻼ ٍق َو ِﻋﺘَﺎ ٍق َو َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ِﻫَﻢ ا‬
Obligations, Breaking the Fast, Intention It is obligatory upon every capable Muslim of legal capacity. It is however required of every guardian to order the capable minor to fast, and smack them for it, in order that they become accustomed to it. Whoever is incapable, due to old age or terminal illness, is to break the fast and is obliged (unless coupled with a common excuse such as travel) to feed one poor person the amount which suffices an expiation for every day.
It is recommended to break the fast, and disliked maintain it, during a journey in which shortening is permitted , even if there is no difficulty. It is disliked for the pregnant and nursing women to fast while they fear for themselves or their child. They are to make up what they broke, and it is

further required of someone feeding a child (while fearing for the child only), to feed a poor person for every day.
Breaking the fast is obligatory if required to save a sacred life from demise, such as drowning, etc. For every obligatory fast there must be a specific intention made at night, even if what contradicts it is done, but not the intention of mere obligation [77] .
Voluntary fasting intended during the day (even after the zawāl), is valid, so long as nothing which spoils the fast has been previously committed. It is deemed as a legislated fast and will be rewarded from its time of commencement. If someone conceives that they will fast tomorrow, they have made an intention, just like eating and drinking with the intention to fast [78] .
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ ﻗَﺎِد ٍر ُﻣَﻜﻠﱠ ٍﻒ، ﻟَِﻜ ْﻦ َﻋﻠَﻰ َوﻟِ ﱢﻲ َﺻِﻐﯿ ٍﺮ ُﻣ ِﻄﯿ ٍﻖ أَْﻣ ُﺮُه ﺑِِﻪ َو َﺿ ْﺮﺑُُﻪ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ﻟِﯿَ ْﻌﺘَﺎَدُه، َوَﻣ ْﻦ‬ ‫َﻋ َﺠ َﺰ َﻋْﻨُﻪ ﻟِِﻜﺒَ ٍﺮ أَْو َﻣ َﺮ ٍض َﻻ ﯾُ ْﺮ َﺟﻰ ﺑُ ْﺮ ُؤُه أْﻓ َﻄ َﺮ َو َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ، َﻻ َﻣ َﻊ ُﻋْﺬ ٍر ُﻣ ْﻌﺘَﺎٍد َﻛ َﺴﻔَ ٍﺮ، َﻋ ْﻦ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ﯾَ ْﻮٍم‬
.ٍ ‫ﻟِِﻤ ْﺴِﻜﯿ ٍﻦ َﻣﺎ ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ ﻓِﻲ َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرة‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻓِ ْﻄ ٌﺮ، َوُﻛ ِﺮَه َﺻ ْﻮٌم ﺑِ َﺴﻔَ ِﺮ ﻗَ ْﺼ ٍﺮ، َوﻟَْﻮ ﺑَِﻼ َﻣ َﺸﻘﱠٍﺔ، َوُﻛ ِﺮَه َﺻﻮُم َﺣﺎِﻣ ٍﻞ َوُﻣ ْﺮ ِﺿ ٍﻊ َﺧﺎﻓَﺘَﺎ َﻋﻠَﻰ أَْﻧﻔُ ِﺴِﻬَﻤﺎ‬ .ٍ ‫أَْو اﻟ َﻮﻟَِﺪ، َوﯾِْﻘ ِﻀﯿَﺎ ِن َﻣﺎ أَْﻓ َﻄ َﺮﺗَﺎُه، َوﯾِﻠْ ِﺰُم َﻣ ْﻦ ﯾَُﻤﻮ ُن اﻟ َﻮﻟََﺪ إِن ِﺧﯿ َﻒ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ﻓَﻘَ ْﻂ إِ ْﻃَﻌﺎُم ِﻣ ْﺴِﻜﯿ ٍﻦ ﻟُِﻜ ﱢﻞ ﯾَ ْﻮم‬ ‫َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ اﻟﻔِ ْﻄ ُﺮ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻣ ْﻦ اِ ْﺣﺘَﺎ َﺟُﻪ ِﻹِْﻧﻘَﺎِذ َﻣ ْﻌ ُﺼﻮٍم ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣ ْﻬﻠََﻜٍﺔ َﻛَﻐ ْﺮ ٍق َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه، َو ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ﻟُِﻜ ﱢﻞ ﯾَ ْﻮٍم َوا ِﺟ ٍﺐ ﻧِـﯿﱠٌﺔ‬
.ِ ‫ُﻣَﻌﯿﱠﻨٌَﺔ ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟﻠﱠﯿ ِﻞ َوﻟَْﻮ أَﺗَﻰ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َﻫﺎ ﺑُِﻤﻨَﺎ ٍف َﻻ ﻧِﯿﱠُﺔ اﻟﻔَ ْﺮ ِﺿﯿﱠﺔ‬ ‫َوﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ َﺻ ْﻮُم ﻧَْﻔ ٍﻞ ِﻣﱠﻤ ْﻦ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَْﻔَﻌ ْﻞ ُﻣْﻔ ِﺴﺪاً ﺑِﻨِﯿﱠﺘِِﻪ ﻧََﻬﺎراً وﻟَْﻮ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟ ﱠﺰ َوا ِل، َوﯾُ ْﺤَﻜُﻢ ﺑِﺎﻟ ﱠﺼ ْﻮِم اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﺮ ِﻋ ﱢﻲ اﻟُﻤﺜَﺎ ِب‬
.ِ ‫َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ َوْﻗﺘَِﻬﺎ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ َﺧ َﻄ َﺮ ﺑِﻘَﻠْﺒِِﻪ ﻟَْﯿ ًﻼ أَﻧﱠُﻪ َﺻﺎﺋٌِﻢ َﻏﺪاً ﻓَﻘَْﺪ ﻧَ َﻮى، َوَﻛَﺬا اﻷَ ْﻛ ُﻞ َواﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﺮ ُب ﺑِﻨَﯿﱠِﺔ اﻟ ﱠﺼ ْﻮم‬
Fast Invalidators Whoever deliberately chooses to do the following, while aware they are fasting, will invalidate their fast: eat, drink, or apply eyeliner (which is known to reach the throat such as kuḥl etc.); insert something inside themselves; detect the flavor of gum [79] being chewed in the throat; swallow phlegm which reaches the mouth; induce vomiting; glance repeatedly or masturbate which stimulates ejaculation of orgasmic fluid; kiss, touch, or do intimate acts (without penetration) ejaculating either orgasmic or arousal fluids; or perform cupping, which draws blood, or has it done. It is not broken due to the following: phlebotomy or incision;

thinking until ejaculation; any of the nullifiers of fasting being committed forgetfully or under duress; ingesting water used to clean the mouth and nose, even if it was exaggerated or done more than three times; unintentionally ingesting a fly or dust; or swallowing saliva that is gathered in the mouth.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،ً‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ أََﻛ َﻞ أَْو َﺷ ِﺮ َب أَْو اِْﻛﺘَ َﺤ َﻞ ﺑَِﻤﺎ َﻋﻠَِﻢ ُو ُﺻﻮﻟَُﻪ إِﻟَﻰ َﺣﻠْﻘِِﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻛ ْﺤ ٍﻞ ِوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮِه، أَْو أَْد َﺧ َﻞ إِﻟَﻰ َﺟ ْﻮﻓِِﻪ َﺷْﯿﺌﺎ‬ ‫أَْو َو َﺟَﺪ َﻃ ْﻌَﻢ ِﻋﻠْ ٍﻚ َﻣ َﻀَﻐُﻪ ﺑِ َﺤﻠْﻘِِﻪ أَْو َو َﺻ َﻞ إِﻟَﻰ ﻓَِﻤِﻪ ﻧُ َﺨﺎَﻣٌﺔ ﻓَﺎْﺑﺘَﻠََﻌَﻬﺎ، أَْو ا ْﺳﺘَﻘَﺎَء ﻓَﻘَﺎَء، أَْو َﻛ ﱠﺮ َر اﻟﻨﱠ َﻈ َﺮ‬ ‫ﻓَﺄَ ْﻣﻨَﻰ أَْو ا ْﺳﺘَ ْﻤﻨَﻰ، أَْو ﻗَﺒﱠ َﻞ أَْو ﻟََﻤ َﺲ أَْو ﺑَﺎ َﺷ َﺮ ُدو َن اﻟﻔَ ْﺮ ِج ﻓَﺄَ ْﻣﻨَﻰ أ ْو أ ْﻣَﺬى، أَْو َﺣ َﺠَﻢ، أَْو ا ْﺣﺘَ َﺠَﻢ َو َﻇَﻬ َﺮ‬ ‫َدٌم، َﻋﺎِﻣﺪاً ُﻣ ْﺨﺘَﺎراً َذاِﻛﺮاً ﻟِ َﺼ ْﻮِﻣِﻪ أَْﻓ َﻄ َﺮ َﻻ ﺑِﻔَ ْﺼٍﺪ َو َﺷ ْﺮ ٍط، َوَﻻ إِ ْن ﻓَﱠﻜ َﺮ ﻓَﺄْﻧ َﺰ َل، َوَﻻ إِ ْن ﻓََﻌ َﻞ َﺷْﯿﺌﺎً ِﻣ ْﻦ‬ ‫َﺟِﻤﯿ ِﻊ اﻟُﻤْﻔ ِﻄ ِﺮا ِت ﻧَﺎ ِﺳﯿﺎً أَْو ُﻣ ْﻜ َﺮﻫﺎً، َوَﻻ إِ ْن َد َﺧ َﻞ َﻣﺎُء َﻣ ْﻀَﻤ َﻀٍﺔ أَْو ا ْﺳﺘِْﻨ َﺸﺎ ٍق َﺣﻠْﻘَُﻪ، َوﻟَْﻮ ﺑَﺎﻟََﻎ أَْو َزاَد‬
.ُ ‫َﻋﻠَﻰ ﺛََﻼ ٍث، َوَﻻ إِ ْن َد َﺧ َﻞ اﻟﱡﺬﺑَﺎ ُب أَْو اﻟُﻐﺒَﺎ ُر َﺣﻠْﻘَُﻪ ﺑَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮ ﻗَ ْﺼٍﺪ، َوَﻻ إِ ْن َﺟَﻤ َﻊ ِرﯾﻘَُﻪ ﻓَﺎْﺑﺘَﻠََﻌﻪ‬
Expiations & Recommended Acts Whoever copulates (vaginally or anally) in the day (even with the deceased or a beast) while fasting, whether under duress or forgetful, must make it up and pay an expiation. The ruling is the same for whoever was voluntarily copulated with if they participated while neither ignorant nor forgetful. Whoever copulates one day and again during another and does not pay the expiation is required to pay a second expiation just like someone who repeats it in one day after paying. The expiation, only for copulation or ejaculation due to lesbian activity during the day of Ramaḍān, is manumission of a healthy bondservant. If one is not available, it is fasting two consecutive months, which if not possible, is feeding 60 poor people. If they are not available, it is voided, unlike the expiation for ḥajj, ẓihār, or an oath.
It is recommended to hasten to break the fast, say what has been narrated when breaking it, and delay the pre-dawn meal.
Whoever misses Ramaḍān is to make it up. It is recommended to do so immediately, except when there only remain the equivalent number of days in Shaʿbān that must be made up, in which case it becomes obligatory.

If required to make up Ramaḍān, it is not valid to begin voluntary fasting. Intending an obligatory fast or a make-up fast and then changing it to a voluntary fast is valid. It is impermissible to delay making up Ramaḍān until the next without an excuse. If done so, it is obligatory to also feed a poor person for every day. If such a squanderer were to die, food must be given from their wealth (even before the following Ramaḍān); it is not to be fasted on their behalf.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ َﺟﺎَﻣ َﻊ ﻓِﻲ ﻧََﻬﺎ ٍر ﻓِﻲ ﻗُﺒُ ٍﻞ أَْو ُدﺑُ ٍﺮ َوﻟَْﻮ ﻟَِﻤﯿﱢ ٍﺖ أَْو ﺑَِﻬﯿَﻤٍﺔ ﻓﻲ َﺣﺎﻟٍَﺔ ﯾَﻠْ َﺰُﻣُﻪ ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ اِﻹ ْﻣ َﺴﺎ ُك ُﻣ ْﻜ َﺮ َﻫﺎً َﻛﺎ َن أَْو‬ ‫ﻧَﺎ ِﺳﯿﺎً ﻟَِﺰَﻣُﻪ اﻟﻘَ َﻀﺎُء َواﻟَﻜﻔﱠﺎ َرُة، َوَﻛَﺬا َﻣ ْﻦ ُﺟﻮِﻣ َﻊ إِ ْن َﻃﺎ َو َع َﻏْﯿ َﺮ َﺟﺎ ِﻫ ٍﻞ َوﻧَﺎ ٍس، َوَﻣ ْﻦ َﺟﺎَﻣ َﻊ ﻓِﻲ ﯾَ ْﻮٍم ﺛُﱠﻢ‬ ‫ﻓِﻲ آ َﺧ ٍﺮ، َوﻟَْﻢ ﯾَُﻜﻔﱢ ْﺮ ﻟَِﺰَﻣْﺘُﻪ ﺛَﺎﻧِﯿٌَﺔ َﻛَﻤ ْﻦ أَ َﻋﺎَدُه ﻓِﻲ ﯾَ ْﻮِﻣِﻪ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ أَ ْن َﻛﻔﱠ َﺮ، َوَﻻ َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرٌة ﺑَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮ اﻟ ِﺠَﻤﺎ ِع َواِﻹْﻧ َﺰا ِل‬ ‫ﺑِﺎﻟُﻤ َﺴﺎ َﺣﻘَِﺔ ﻧََﻬﺎ َر َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن، َو ِﻫ َﻲ ِﻋْﺘ ُﻖ َرﻗَﺒٍَﺔ ُﻣ ْﺆِﻣﻨٍَﺔ َﺳﻠِﯿَﻤٍﺔ؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺠْﺪ ﻓَ ِﺼﯿَﺎُم َﺷ ْﻬ َﺮْﯾ ِﻦ ُﻣﺘَﺘَﺎﺑَِﻌْﯿ ِﻦ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن‬
.ٍ ‫ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺴﺘَ ِﻄ ْﻊ ﻓَﺈِ ْﻃَﻌﺎُم ِﺳﺘﱢﯿ َﻦ ِﻣ ْﺴِﻜﯿﻨﺎً، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺠْﺪ َﺳﻘَ َﻄ ْﺖ ﺑِ ِﺨَﻼ ِف َﻛﻔﱠﺎرِة َﺣ ﱟﺞ أَْو ِﻇَﻬﺎ ٍر أَْو ﯾَِﻤﯿﻦ‬ .ٍ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﺗَ ْﻌ ِﺠﯿ ُﻞ ﻓِ ْﻄ ٍﺮ، َوﺗَْﺄ ِﺧﯿ ُﺮ َﺳ ُﺤﻮ ٍر، َوﻗَ ْﻮ ُل َﻣﺎ َو َرَد ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ﻓِ ْﻄﺮ‬
ُ ‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﻓَﺎﺗَُﻪ َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ ُن ﻗَ َﻀﻰ َﻋَﺪَد أَﯾﱠﺎِﻣِﻪ، َوﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟﻔَ ْﻮ ِر إِﱠﻻ إَِذا ﺑَﻘِ َﻲ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﻌﺒَﺎ َن ﺑِﻘََﺪ ِر َﻣﺎ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ﻓَﯿَ ِﺠﺐ‬ .
َ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ اْﺑﺘَِﺪاُء ﺗَ َﻄ ﱡﻮ ِع َﻣ ْﻦ َﻋﻠِْﯿِﻪ ﻗَ َﻀﺎُء َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻧَ َﻮى َﺻ ْﻮﻣﺎً َوا ِﺟﺒﺎً أَْو ﻗَ َﻀﺎًء ﺛُﱠﻢ ﻗَﻠَﺒَُﻪ ﻧَْﻔ ًﻼ َﺻ ّﺢ‬ ‫. َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم ﺗَْﺄ ِﺧﯿ ُﺮ ﻗَ َﻀﺎِء َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن إِﻟَﻰ آ َﺧ ٍﺮ ﺑَِﻼ ُﻋْﺬ ٍر؛ ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻓََﻌ َﻞ َو َﺟ َﺐ َﻣ َﻊ اﻟﻘَ َﻀﺎِء إِ ْﻃَﻌﺎُم ِﻣ ْﺴِﻜﯿ ٍﻦ َﻋ ْﻦ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ‬
.ُ ‫ﯾَ ْﻮٍم، َوإِ ْن َﻣﺎ َت اﻟُﻤﻔَ ﱢﺮ ُط َوﻟَْﻮ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ آ َﺧ َﺮ أُ ْﻃِﻌَﻢ َﻋْﻨُﻪ َﻛَﺬﻟِ َﻚ ِﻣ ْﻦ َرأْ ِس َﻣﺎﻟِِﻪ، َوَﻻ ﯾُ َﺼﺎُم َﻋْﻨﻪ‬
Voluntary Fasting Voluntary fasts are recommended, the best of which are the following; every other day; three days of every month—the white days i.e. 13 th , 14 th , and 15 th are best; Thursdays and Mondays; six days of Shawwāl (best to be done consecutively after ʿEid and when coupled with Ramaḍān are equivalent in reward to fasting the year); fasting Muḥarram [80] (both the ninth and especially the tenth which is an expiation for the year); and the 10 days of Dhul-Ḥijjah (especially the day of ʿArafah which is an expiation for two years).
The following are disliked to single out for fasting: Rajab [81] ; Friday; Saturday; the day of doubt, i.e. the 30 th of Shaʿbān (if there is no justification when it is time for the sighting); fasting Nayrūz [82] and

Mahrajān [83] ; every holiday of the disbelievers; any day singled out for veneration; and preceding Ramaḍān by one or two days, unless any of the above coincide with a habitual fast. Fasting the days of tashrīq [84] is not valid unless done so for the ritual sacrifice of mutʿah or qirān [85] . There is absolutely no fasting on ʿEid, which is impermissible. Whoever begins a voluntary deed (besides ḥajj or ʿumrah), is recommended to complete it but not obliged. If it is nullified, it does not have to be made up. It is categorically obligatory to complete a compulsory act, even if its time is extensive, e.g. prayer, making up Ramaḍān, an oath, and an expiation. If it is invalidated, there is nothing extra to be done [86] , nor is there an expiation. The best day is Friday and the best night is Laylat al-Qadr (sought in the last 10 of Ramaḍān, particularly in their odd nights, of which the most hopeful is the seventh). Abundant supplication should be made in them saying, “O Allāh, indeed you are oft-pardoning who loves to pardon, so pardon me.”
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺻ ْﻮُم اﻟﺘَ َﻄ ﱡﻮ ِع، َوأْﻓ َﻀﻠُُﻪ ﯾَ ْﻮٌم َوﯾَ ْﻮٌم، َو َﺻ ْﻮُم ﺛََﻼﺛٍَﺔ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َﺷ ْﻬ ٍﺮ، َوأَﯾﱠﺎُم اﻟﺒِْﯿ ِﺾ أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ ﺛََﻼ َث‬ ‫َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮَة َوأَ ْرﺑَ َﻊ َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮَة َو َﺧ ْﻤ َﺲ َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮَة، َواﻟَ ِﺨﻤﯿ ُﺲ َواﻻِْﺛﻨَْﯿ ُﻦ، َو ِﺳ ﱞﺖ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ﱠﻮا ٍل، َواﻷَ ْوﻟَﻰ ﺗَﺘَﺎﺑُُﻌَﻬﺎ، َو َﻋﻘِ َﺐ‬ ‫اﻟِﻌْﯿِﺪ، َو َﺻﺎﺋُِﻤَﻬﺎ َﻣ َﻊ َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن َﻛﺄَﻧﱠَﻤﺎ َﺻﺎَم اﻟﱠﺪ ْﻫ َﺮ، َو َﺻ ْﻮُم اﻟُﻤ َﺤ ﱠﺮِم، َوآَﻛُﺪُه اﻟَﻌﺎ ِﺷ ُﺮ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرُة َﺳﻨٍَﺔ، ﺛُﱠﻢ‬
.ِ ‫اﻟﺘﱠﺎ ِﺳ ُﻊ، َو َﻋ َﺸ ُﺮ ِذي اﻟ ِﺤ ﱠﺠِﺔ، َوآَﻛُﺪُه ﯾَ ْﻮُم َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرُة َﺳﻨَﺘَْﯿﻦ‬ ‫َوُﻛ ِﺮَه إِْﻓ َﺮاُد َر َﺟ ٍﺐ، َواﻟ ُﺠُﻤَﻌِﺔ، َواﻟ ﱠﺴْﺒ ِﺖ ﺑِ َﺼ ْﻮٍم، َو َﺻ ْﻮُم ﯾَﻮِم اﻟ ﱠﺸ ﱢﻚ َو ُﻫ َﻮ اﻟﺜﱠَﻼﺛُﻮ َن ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﻌﺒَﺎ َن إَِذا ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَُﻜ ْﻦ‬ ،‫ِﺣﯿ َﻦ اﻟﺘﱠ َﺮاﺋِ ِﻲ ِﻋﻠﱠٌﺔ، َو َﺻ ْﻮُم ﯾَ ْﻮِم اﻟﻨَْﯿ ُﺮو ِز َواﻟَﻤ ْﻬ َﺮ َﺟﺎ ِن، َوُﻛ ﱢﻞ ِﻋﯿٍﺪ ﻟِﻠُْﻜﻔﱠﺎ ِر، أَْو ﯾَ ْﻮٍم ﯾُْﻔ ِﺮُدوﻧَُﻪ ﺑِﺘَ ْﻌ ِﻈﯿٍﻢ‬
.ِ ‫َوﺗَﻘَﱡﺪُم َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن ﺑِﯿَ ْﻮٍم أَْو ﯾَ ْﻮَﻣْﯿ ِﻦ إِﱠﻻ أَ ْن ﯾُ َﻮاﻓِ َﻖ َﻋﺎَدًة ﻓِﻲ اﻟُﻜ ّﻞ‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ َﺻ ْﻮُم أَﯾﱠﺎِم اﻟﺘﱠ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ ِﻖ إِﱠﻻ َﻋ ْﻦ َدِم ُﻣْﺘَﻌٍﺔ أَْو ﻗِ َﺮا ٍن، َوَﻻ َﺻ ْﻮُم ِﻋْﯿٍﺪ ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎً ِوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم، َوَﻣ ْﻦ َد َﺧ َﻞ ﻓِﻲ‬ ً‫ﺗَ َﻄ ﱡﻮ ٍع َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َﺣ ﱟﺞ أَْو ُﻋ ْﻤ َﺮٍة ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺠ ْﺐ إِﺗَ ْﻤﺎُﻣُﻪ وﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ، َوإِ ْن ﻓَ َﺴَﺪ ﻓََﻼ ﻗَ َﻀﺎء َ. َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ إِْﺗَﻤﺎُم ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍض َﻣ ْﻄﻠَﻘﺎ‬
.َ ‫َوﻟَْﻮ ُﻣ َﻮ ﱠﺳﻌﺎً َﻛ َﺼَﻼٍة، َوﻗَ َﻀﺎِء َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن، َوﻧَْﺬ ٍر ُﻣ ْﻄﻠَ ٍﻖ، َوَﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرٍة، َوإِ ْن ﺑَ َﻄ َﻞ ﻓََﻼ َﻣ ِﺰﯾَﺪ َوَﻻ َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرة‬ ،‫َوأْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ اﻷَﯾﱠﺎِم ﯾَ ْﻮُم اﻟ ُﺠُﻤَﻌِﺔ، َوأَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ اﻟﻠﱠﯿَﺎﻟِﻲ ﻟَْﯿﻠَُﺔ اﻟﻘْﺪ ِر، َوﺗُ ْﻄﻠَ ُﺐ ﻓِﻲ اﻟَﻌ ْﺸ ِﺮ اﻷَ ِﺧﯿ ِﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن‬ ‫َوأَْوﺗَﺎ ُرُه آَﻛُﺪ، َوأََر َﺟﺎ َﻫﺎ َﺳﺎﺑَِﻌﺘُُﻪ، َوﯾُ ْﻜﺜِ ُﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُد َﻋﺎﺋِِﻪ ﻓِﯿَﻪ ا : " اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ إِﻧﱠ َﻚ َﻋﻔُ ٌﻮ ﺗُ ِﺤ ﱡﺐ اﻟَﻌْﻔ َﻮ ﻓَﺎ ْﻋ ُﻒ َﻋ ﱢﻦ‬
". ‫ي‬
Iʿttikāf

Iʿttikāf [87] is recommended all the time, especially in Ramaḍān, in which the last 10 are more emphasized. It becomes obligatory due to a vow. Its prerequisites include the following: intention; Islām; sanity; discernment; and the absence of what necessitates ghusl. Additionally, it must be in a masjid that establishes congregational prayer for those required to attend. The masjid includes its expansion, its roof, its fenced courtyard, and its minaret (which either it, or its door, is within it) [88] .
Whoever vows to make iʿttikāf, or perform prayer in a masjid other than the three, is permitted to do so in a different one. If they vowed to make it in one of them, they are permitted to do so in it or in a more virtuous one. The best of them is Masjid al-Ḥarām, then the Prophet’s Masjid, then alAqṣā.
Whoever makes continual iʿttikāf due to a vow, is not to leave, except out of necessity. They are not to visit the sick, nor attend a funeral, unless stipulated. It is invalidated by the following: leaving the masjid without excuse; intending to leave (even if they do not); intercourse; ejaculation due to intimate acts; apostasy; and intoxication. Wherever it is invalidated, the continual non-time-specific type must be recommenced without expiation. That which is time-specific must be recommenced with an obligatory expiation for breaking an oath due to the loss of setting.
It is not invalidated for leaving the masjid to use the restroom, bring food, attend Jumuʿah (which is required), or perform some obligatory purification, etc. It is recommended to be busy with righteous deeds and refrain from what is of no concern. It is impermissible to make the Qurʾān a replacement for speech [89] . When going to the masjid, iʿttikāf should be intended for the duration they remain there.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ .ُ ‫َواﻻِ ْﻋﺘَِﻜﺎ ُف ُﺳﻨﱠٌﺔ ُﻛ ﱠﻞ َوْﻗ ٍﺖ، َوﻓِﻲ َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن آَﻛُﺪ، َوآَﻛُﺪُه َﻋ ْﺸ ُﺮُه اﻷَ ِﺧﯿﺮ‬
‫َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﺑِﻨَْﺬ ٍر، َو ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ﻟَُﻪ ﻧِﯿﱠٌﺔ، َوإِ ْﺳَﻼٌم، َو َﻋْﻘ ٌﻞ، َوﺗَ ْﻤﯿِﯿ ٌﺰ، َو َﻋَﺪُم َﻣﺎ ﯾُﻮ ِﺟ ُﺐ اﻟُﻐ ْﺴ َﻞ، َوَﻛ ْﻮﻧُُﻪ ﺑَِﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ، َوﯾَ َﺰاُد‬ ،‫ﻓِﻲ َﺣ ﱢﻖ َﻣ ْﻦ ﺗَﻠْ َﺰُﻣُﻪ اﻟ َﺠَﻤﺎ َﻋُﺔ أَ ْن ﯾَُﻜﻮ َن اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠُﺪ ِﻣﱠﻤﺎ ﺗُﻘَﺎُم ﻓِﯿِﻪ، َوِﻣ َﻦ اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠِﺪ َﻣﺎ ِزْﯾَﺪ ﻓِﯿِﻪ، َوِﻣْﻨُﻪ َﻇ ْﻬ ُﺮُه‬
.ِ ‫َو َر ْﺣﺒَﺘُُﻪ اﻟَﻤ ُﺤﻮ َﻃُﺔ، َوَﻣﻨَﺎ َرﺗُُﻪ اﻟﱠﺘِﻲ ِﻫ َﻲ أَْو ﺑَﺎﺑَُﻬﺎ ﻓِﯿﻪ‬ ‫وَﻣ ْﻦ ﻧََﺬ َر اﻻِ ْﻋﺘَِﻜﺎ َف أَْو اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼَة ﻓِﻲ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠٍﺪ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ اﻟﺜﱠَﻼﺛَِﺔ ﻓَﻠَُﻪ ﻓِ ْﻌﻠُُﻪ ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه، َوﻓِﻲ أَ َﺣِﺪ َﻫﺎ ﻓَﻠَُﻪ ﻓِ ْﻌﻠُُﻪ ﻓِﯿِﻪ‬
. ‫َوﻓِﻲ اﻷَْﻓ َﻀ ِﻞ ِﻣْﻨَﻪ، َوأَْﻓ َﻀﻠَُﻬﺎ اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠُﺪ اﻟ َﺤ َﺮاُم، ﺛُﱠﻢ َﻣ ْﺴ ِﺠُﺪ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ﱢﻲ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻷَْﻗ َﺺ ى‬

‫ًﱠ‬

ًَْ

َُ َ ‫ﱠ‬

ًَ ً ُ َ

‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ اِ ْﻋﺘََﻜ َﻒ َﻣْﻨُﺬوراً ُﻣﺘَﺘَﺎﺑِﻌﺎً ﻟْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﺮ ْج إِﱠﻻ ﻟَِﻤﺎ َﻻ ﺑُﱠﺪ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ، َوَﻻ ﯾُِﻌﻮُد َﻣ ِﺮﯾﻀﺎً، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ْﺸَﻬُﺪ َﺟﻨَﺎ َزًة إِﱠﻻ‬ ‫ﺑِ َﺸ ْﺮط ٍ . َوﯾَْﺒ ُﻄ ُﻞ ﺑِﺎﻟُ ُﺨﺮو ِج ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠِﺪ ﻟَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮ ُﻋْﺬ ٍر، َوﺑِﻨِﯿﱠِﺔ اﻟ ُﺨ ُﺮو ِج َوﻟَْﻮ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ْﺨ ُﺮ ْج، َوﺑِﺎﻟ َﻮ ْطِء ﻓِﻲ‬ ‫اﻟﻔَ ْﺮ ِج، َوﺑِﺎِﻹْﻧ َﺰا ِل ﺑِﺎﻟُﻤﺒَﺎ َﺷ َﺮِة ُدو َن اﻟﻔَ ْﺮ ِج، َوﺑِﺎﻟ ﱢﺮﱠدِة، َوﺑِﺎﻟ ﱡﺴ ْﻜ ِﺮ، َو َﺣْﯿ ُﺚ ﺑَ َﻄ َﻞ َو َﺟ َﺐ اِ ْﺳﺘِْﺌﻨَﺎ ُف اﻟُﻤﺘَﺘَﺎﺑِ ِﻊ‬ ‫َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ اﻟُﻤﻘَﯿﱠِﺪ ﺑِ َﺰَﻣ ٍﻦ َوَﻻ َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرة َ. َوإِ ْن َﻛﺎ َن ُﻣﻘَﯿﱠﺪاً ﺑِ َﺰَﻣ ٍﻦ َﻣَﻌﯿﱠ ٍﻦ اِ ْﺳﺘَْﺄﻧَﻔَُﻪ، َو َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َﻛﻔﱠﺎ َرُة ﯾَِﻤﯿ ٍﻦ ﻟِﻔَ َﻮا ِت اﻟَﻤ َﺤ ّﻞ‬
. ِ
‫َوَﻻ َﯾْﺒ ُﻄ ُﻞ إِ ْن َﺧ َﺮ َج ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ َﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠِﺪ ﻟَِﺒ ْﻮ ٍل أَ ْو َﻏﺎِﺋ ٍﻂ أَ ْو إِْﺗَﯿﺎ ٍن ِﺑ َﻤْﺄ َﻛ ٍﻞ َو َﻣ ْﺸ َﺮ ٍب أَ ْو ﻟِ ُﺠ ُﻤ َﻌ ٍﺔ َﺗْﻠ َﺰ ُﻣ ُﻪ‬ .َ ‫أَ ْو َﻃ َﻬﺎ َرٍة َوا ِﺟَﺒ ٍﺔ َوَﻧ ْﺤ ِﻮ َذﻟِﻚ‬
،‫َوُﯾ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﺗ َﺸﺎ ُﻏﻠُ ُﻪ ِﺑﺎﻟُﻘ َﺮ ِب، َوا ْﺟِﺘَﻨﺎ ِب َﻣﺎ َﻻ َﯾ ْﻌِﻨﯿ ِﻪ، َوَﯾ ْﺤ ُﺮُم َﺟ ْﻌ ُﻞ اﻟُﻘ ْﺮآ ِن َﺑَﺪ ًﻻ ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟ َﻜَﻼِم‬ .ِ ‫َوِﯾْﻨَﺒ ِﻐﻲ ﻟِ َﻤ ْﻦ َﻗ َﺼَﺪ اﻟ َﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠَﺪ أَ ْن ِﯾَﻨ ِﻮ َي اِﻻ ْﻋِﺘ َﻜﺎ َف ُﻣﱠﺪَة ﻟُْﺒِﺜ ِﻪ ِﻓﯿﻪ‬
Ḥajj It is a communal obligation every year. It is to go to Makkah to perform specific acts at specific times and is a pillar of Islām. ʿUmrah is to visit the house in a specific manner. Both are obligatory once in a lifetime based on five prerequisites, which include: Islām; sanity (it is not valid from a disbeliever or the insane even if the guardian were to make iḥrām [90] on their behalf); puberty; and complete freedom (it is valid for a minor or a bondservant).
The minor’s guardian is to make iḥrām on their behalf. It will not suffice either of them for their obligatory ḥajj or ʿumrah.
If a minor reaches puberty, or a bondservant is manumitted, before ‘the standing’ or after it (and they return within enough time), it will suffice their obligatory ḥajj.
The fifth is capability i.e. owning provisions and suitable transport, or possession of what is enough to obtain it, so long as it is in addition to what is required of books, dwellings, servants, and both personal and familial expenses necessary for survival.
Whoever meets these prerequisites is immediately required to go, so long as the way is safe. If they are unable to go due to old age or chronic illness, a free proxy (even if female) must perform both on their behalf if they are obligations. It is not valid for someone who has not completed ḥajj to perform the obligatory, vowed, or voluntary ḥajj on behalf of another. If they do so, it will be counted as their own obligatory ḥajj. There is an additional sixth prerequisite for females; they must find a husband or maḥram of legal capacity who can afford both their provisions and

‫‪transport. If they are not able, they are to appoint a proxy. If they make‬‬ ‫.‪ḥajj without a maḥram it is considered valid though impermissible‬‬

‫ِﻛﺘَﺎ ُب اﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺞ‬ ‫َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﻓَ ْﺮ ُض ِﻛﻔَﺎﯾٍَﺔ ُﻛ ﱠﻞ َﻋﺎٍم، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﻗَ ْﺼُﺪ َﻣﱠﻜَﺔ ﻟَِﻌَﻤ ٍﻞ َﻣ ْﺨ ُﺼﻮ ٍص ﻓِﻲ َزَﻣ ٍﻦ َﻣ ْﺨ ُﺼﻮ ٍص، َو ُﻫ َﻮ أَ َﺣُﺪ أَ ْرَﻛﺎ ِن‬ ‫اِﻹ ْﺳَﻼم ِ . َواﻟُﻌ ْﻤ َﺮُة ِزﯾَﺎ َرُة اﻟﺒَْﯿ ِﺖ َﻋﻠَﻰ َو ْﺟٍﻪ َﻣ ْﺨ ُﺼﻮص ٍ. َوﯾَ ِﺠﺒَﺎ ِن ﻓِﻲ اﻟُﻌ ْﻤ ِﺮ َﻣ ﱠﺮًة ﺑِ َﺨ ْﻤ َﺴِﺔ ُﺷ ُﺮوط ٍ‬ ‫: َو ِﻫ َﻲ اِﻹ ْﺳَﻼُم، َواﻟَﻌْﻘ ُﻞ، ﻓََﻼ ﯾَ ِﺼ ﱠﺤﺎ ِن ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻛﺎﻓِ ٍﺮ َوَﻣ ْﺠﻨُﻮ ٍن َوﻟَْﻮ أَ ْﺣ َﺮَم َﻋْﻨُﻪ َوﻟِﯿﱡُﻪ، َواﻟﺒُﻠُﻮ ُغ، َوَﻛَﻤﺎ ُل‬ ‫اﻟ ُﺤ ِﺮﯾﱠِﺔ، ﻟَِﻜ ْﻦ ﯾَ ِﺼ ﱠﺤﺎ ِن ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺼِﻐﯿ ِﺮ َواﻟ ﱠﺮﻗِﯿ ِﻖ، َوﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺮُم َﻋ ْﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺼِﻐﯿ ِﺮ َوﻟِﯿﱡُﻪ، َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰﺋَﺎ ِن َﻋ ْﻦ ِﺣ ﱠﺠِﺔ‬ ‫اِﻹ ْﺳَﻼِم َو ُﻋ ْﻤ َﺮﺗِِﻪ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﺑَﻠََﻎ اﻟ ﱠﺼِﻐﯿ ُﺮ أَْو ُﻋﺘِ َﻖ اﻟ ﱠﺮﻗِﯿ ُﻖ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟ ُﻮﻗُﻮ ِف أَْو ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪُه إِ ْن أَ َﻋﺎَد ﻓَ َﻮﻗَ َﻒ ﻓِﻲ َوْﻗﺘِِﻪ‬ ‫أَ ْﺟ َﺰأَُه َﻋ ْﻦ ِﺣ ﱠﺠِﺔ اﻹ ْﺳَﻼِم، َواﻟ َﺨﺎِﻣ ُﺲ اﻻِ ْﺳﺘَ َﻄﺎ َﻋُﺔ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ ِﻣﻠْ ُﻚ َزاٍد َو َرا ِﺣﻠٍَﺔ ﺗَ ْﺼﻠُ ُﺢ ﻟِِﻤْﺜﻠِِﻪ، أَْو ِﻣﻠْ ُﻚ َﻣﺎ‬ ‫ﯾَْﻘِﺪ ُر ﺑِِﻪ َﻋﻠَﻰ ﺗَ ْﺤ ِﺼﯿ ِﻞ َذﻟِ َﻚ ﺑِ َﺸ ْﺮ ِط َﻛ ْﻮﻧِِﻪ ﻓَﺎ ِﺿ ًﻼ َﻋﱠﻤﺎ ﯾِ ْﺤﺘَﺎ ُﺟُﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻛﺘُ ٍﺐ َوَﻣ ْﺴَﻜ ٍﻦ َو َﺧﺎِدٍم، َو َﻋ ْﻦ ُﻣ ْﺆﻧَﺘِِﻪ‬
‫َوُﻣ ْﺆﻧَِﺔ ِﻋﯿَﺎﻟِِﻪ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟﱠﺪ َوام ِ.‬
‫َﻓ َﻤ ْﻦ َﻛ ُﻤﻠَ ْﺖ ﻟَ ُﻪ َﻫِﺬِه اﻟ ﱡﺸ ُﺮو ُط ﻟَ ِﺰ َﻣ ُﻪ اﻟ ﱠﺴ ْﻌ ُﻲ َﻓ ْﻮراً إِ ْن َﻛﺎ َن ِﻓﻲ اﻟ ﱠﻄ ِﺮﯾ ِﻖ أَ ْﻣ ٌﻦ، َﻓﺈِ ْن َﻋ َﺠ َﺰ َﻋْﻨ ُﻪ‬ ‫ﻟِ ِﻜَﺒ ٍﺮ أَ ْو َﻣ َﺮ ٍض َﻻ ُﯾ ْﺮ َﺟﻰ ُﺑ ْﺮ ُؤُه ﻟَ ِﺰ َﻣ ُﻪ أَ ْن ُﯾِﻘﯿَﻢ َﻧﺎِﺋﺒﺎً ُﺣ ‪‬ﺮا َوﻟَ ْﻮ اِ ْﻣ َﺮأًَة َﯾ ُﺤ ﱡﺞ َوَﯾ ْﻌَﺘ ِﻤ ُﺮ َﻋْﻨ ُﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ‬ ‫َﺣْﯿ ُﺚ َو َﺟَﺒﺎ، َوَﻻ َﯾ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ ِﻣﱠﻤ ْﻦ ﻟَ ْﻢ َﯾ ُﺤ ﱠﺞ َﻋ ْﻦ َﻧْﻔ ِﺴ ِﻪ َﺣ ﱞﺞ َﻋ ْﻦ َﻓ ْﺮ ِض َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه، َوَﻻ َﻋ ْﻦ َﻧ ْﺬ ٍر َوَﻻ‬ ‫َﻧﺎِﻓﻠَ ٍﺔ، َﻓﺈِ ْن َﻓ َﻌ َﻞ اْﻧ َﺼ َﺮ َف إِﻟَﻰ ِﺣ ﱠﺠ ِﺔ اِﻹ ْﺳَﻼِم، َوَﺗ ِﺰﯾُﺪ ا ُﻷْﻧَﺜﻰ َﺷ ْﺮﻃﺎً َﺳﺎِدﺳﺎً َو ُﻫ َﻮ أَ ْن َﺗ ِﺠَﺪ ﻟَ َﻬﺎ‬ ‫َز ْوﺟﺎً أَ ْو َﻣ ْﺤ َﺮﻣﺎً ُﻣ َﻜﻠﱠﻔﺎً، َوأَ ْن َﺗْﻘِﺪ َر َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ ﱠﺰاِد َواﻟ ﱠﺮا ِﺣﻠَ ِﺔ ﻟَ َﻬﺎ َوﻟَ ُﻪ، َﻓﺈِ ْن أَِﯾ َﺴ ْﺖ ِﻣْﻨ ُﻪ ا ْﺳَﺘَﻨﺎَﺑ ْﺖ،‬
‫َوإِ ْن َﺣ ﱠﺠ ْﺖ ِﺑَﻼ َﻣ ْﺤ َﺮٍم َﺣ ُﺮَم َوأَ ْﺟ َﺰأ َ.‬
‫‪Miqāts‬‬ ‫‪The miqāts are specified places and times for specific acts of worship. The‬‬ ‫‪Miqāt for Madīnah is Dhul-Ḥulayfa, for the Levant, Egypt, and the west is‬‬ ‫‪Juḥfa, for Yemen is Yalamlam, for the highlands of the Ḥijāz, the‬‬ ‫‪highlands of Yemen, and Tāʾif is Qarn, and for the east is Dhāt ʿIrq. These‬‬ ‫‪are for their respective inhabitants and all who pass by. The miqāt of‬‬ ‫‪whoever’s dwelling is closer than them is their dwelling itself. Whoever is‬‬ ‫‪in Makkah, is to make iḥrām for ḥajj there. It is valid from outside sacred‬‬ ‫‪grounds without a blood sacrifice. Iḥrām for ʿumrah is made from outside‬‬ ‫.‪sacred grounds. It is valid from Makkah but requires a blood sacrifice‬‬

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َواﻟَﻤ َﻮاﻗِﯿ ُﺖ َﻣ َﻮا ِﺿ ٌﻊ َوأَ ْزِﻣﻨٌَﺔ ُﻣَﻌﯿﱠﻨٌَﺔ ﻟِِﻌﺒِﺎدٍة َﻣ ْﺨ ُﺼﻮ ُﺻٍﺔ، ﻓَِﻤﯿﻘَﺎ ُت أَْﻫ ِﻞ اﻟَﻤِﺪﯾﻨَِﺔ ُذو اﻟ ُﺤﻠَْﯿﻔَِﺔ، َواﻟ ﱠﺸﺎِم‬ ‫َوِﻣ ْﺼ َﺮ َواﻟَﻤ ْﻐ ِﺮ ِب اﻟ ُﺠ ْﺤﻔَُﺔ، َواﻟﯿََﻤ ِﻦ ﯾَﻠَْﻤﻠَُﻢ، َوﻧَ ْﺠِﺪ اﻟِ َﺤﺠﺎ ِز َواﻟﯿََﻤ ِﻦ َواﻟ ﱠﻄﺎﺋِ َﻒ ﻗَ ْﺮ ٌن، َواﻟَﻤ ْﺸ ِﺮ ِق َذا ُت‬

‫ُُ َ َ ُُ‬

‫َ‬

‫َ‬

.ُ ‫ِﻋ ْﺮ ٍق، َو َﻫِﺬِه ِﻷ ْﻫﻠَِﻬﺎ َوﻟَِﻤ ْﻦ َﻣ ﱠﺮ َﻋﻠْﯿَﻬﺎ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ َﻣْﻨ ِﺰﻟُﻪ ُدوﻧََﻬﺎ ﻓَِﻤﯿﻘﺎﺗُُﻪ ِﻣْﻨﻪ‬ ‫َوﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺮُم َﻣ ْﻦ ﺑَِﻤﱠﻜَﺔ ﻟِ َﺤ ﱟﺞ ِﻣْﻨَﻬﺎ، وﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ ِﺤ ﱢﻞ َوَﻻ َدَم َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ، َوﻟُِﻌ ْﻤ َﺮٍة ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ ِﺤ ﱢﻞ، َوﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣﱠﻜَﺔ‬
.ٌ ‫َو َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َدم‬
Iḥrām & Ḥajj Types It is recommended for anyone wishing to make iḥrām, i.e. the intention for the rites, to: perform ghusl or tayummum to cleanse themselves; to perfume their body (which is disliked on the clothing); and for men to wear two clean white coverings, one upper and one lower, after removing all fitted clothing. Iḥrām is made after a compulsory or two-rakʿah voluntary prayer (outside of the prohibited times). Its intention is a prerequisite. The best type is tamattuʿ i.e. to make iḥrām for ʿumrah during the months of ḥajj and then after its completion to make iḥrām for ḥajj. Ifrād is to make iḥrām for ḥajj and then after its completion to make iḥrām for ʿumrah. Qirān is to make iḥrām for both together or to make iḥrām for ʿumrah and then add it [91] before beginning its ṭawāf.
It is recommended to specify a ritual type and to make it conditional, saying, “O Allāh I desire such and such ritual, so facilitate it for me and accept it from me and if I were to be prevented by something, then my place of disengagement is wherever I am prevented”. If it is made, it is not voided, and thus must be completed and made up.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻟُِﻤ ِﺮﯾِﺪ اﻹِ ْﺣ َﺮاِم، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﻧِﯿﱠُﺔ اﻟﻨﱡ ُﺴ ِﻚ، ُﻏ ْﺴ ٌﻞ أَْو ﺗَﯿَـﱡﻤٌﻢ َوﺗَﻨَ ﱡﻈ ٌﻒ، وﺗَ َﻄﯿﱡ ٌﺐ ﻓِﻲ ﺑََﺪ ٍن، وُﻛ ِﺮَه ﻓِﻲ ﺛَ ْﻮ ٍب‬ ‫َوﻟُﺒ ُﺲ إَِزا ٍر َو ِرَداٍء أَْﺑﯿَ َﻀْﯿ ِﻦ ﻧَ ِﻈﯿﻔَْﯿ ِﻦ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﺗَ َﺠ ﱡﺮِد َذَﻛ ٍﺮ َﻋ ْﻦ َﻣ ِﺨﯿ ٍﻂ، َوإِ ْﺣ َﺮاُﻣُﻪ َﻋﻘِ َﺐ َﺻَﻼِة ﻓَ ْﺮ ٍض أَْو‬
.ٌ ‫َر ْﻛَﻌﺘَْﯿ ِﻦ ﻧَْﻔ ًﻼ ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ َوْﻗ ِﺖ ﻧَ ْﻬ ٍﻲ، َوﻧِﯿﱠﺘُُﻪ َﺷ ْﺮط‬ ،‫َوأَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ اﻷَْﻧ َﺴﺎ ِك اﻟﺘﱠَﻤﺘُ ُﻊ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ أَ ْن ﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺮَم ﺑِﺎﻟُﻌ ْﻤ َﺮِة ﻓِﻲ أَ ْﺷُﻬ ِﺮ اﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺞ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﺑََﻌَﺪ ﻓَ َﺮا ِﻏِﻪ ِﻣْﻨَﻬﺎ ﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺮُم ﺑِﺎﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺞ‬ ‫َواِﻹْﻓ َﺮاُد أَ ْن ﯾُﺤ ِﺮَم ﺑِﺎﻟَﺤ ﱢﺞ ﺛُﱠﻢ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﻓَ َﺮا ِﻏِﻪ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ ﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺮُم ﺑِﺎﻟُﻌ ْﻤ َﺮِة، َواﻟﻘِ َﺮا ُن أَ ْن ﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺮَم ﺑِِﻬَﻤﺎ َﻣﻌﺎً أَْو ﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺮَم‬
. ‫ﺑِﺎﻟُﻌ ْﻤ َﺮِة ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُْﺪ ِﺧﻠُُﻪ َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟ ﱡﺸ ُﺮو ِع ﻓِﻲ َﻃ َﻮاﻓَِﻪ ا‬ ،‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ أَ ْن ﯾَُﻌﯿﱢ َﻦ ﻧُ ُﺴﻜﺎً، َوأَ ْن ﯾَ ْﺸﺘَ ِﺮ َط ﻓَﯿَﻘُﻮل ُ : اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ إِﻧﱢﻲ أُِرﯾُﺪ اﻟﻨﱡ ُﺴ َﻚ اﻟﻔَُﻼﻧِ ﱠﻲ ﻓَﯿَ ﱢﺴ ْﺮُه ﻟِﻲ، َوﺗَﻘَﺒﱠﻠَُﻪ ِﻣﻨﱢﻲ‬
.ُ ‫َوإِ ْن َﺣﺒَ َﺴﻨِﻲ َﺣﺎﺑِ ٌﺲ ﻓََﻤ ِﺤﻠﱢﻲ َﺣْﯿ ُﺚ َﺣﺒَ ْﺴﺘَﻨِﻲ، َوإَِذا اْﻧَﻌﻘََﺪ ﻟَْﻢ ﯾُْﺒ َﻄ ْﻞ، ﺑَ ْﻞ ﯾَﻠْ َﺰُﻣُﻪ إِْﺗَﻤﺎُﻣُﻪ َواﻟﻘَ َﻀﺎء‬

Prohibitions of Iḥrām There are nine prohibitions of iḥrām which are: removing hair; clipping finger or toe nails; covering the head of a male; a male wearing fitted clothing (except for pants in the absence of a waist wrap and khuffs in the absence of sandals); applying perfume; killing a consumable land game animal; what it begets; and what is begotten from cross-breading; entering a marriage contract; intercourse; and other intimate acts.
For all the prohibitions there are expiations, except for killing lice and entering a marriage contract. The local value for eggs and locusts must be paid. The expiation of a single hair and nail is feeding a poor person and that of two, is two. Necessity knows no law for the muḥrim [92] , however they must offer an expiation.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوَﻣ ْﺤ ُﻈﻮ َرا ُت اِﻹ ْﺣ َﺮاِم ﺗِ ْﺴﻊ ٌ : إَِزاﻟَُﺔ َﺷ ْﻌ ٍﺮ، َوﺗَْﻘﻠِﯿُﻢ ُﻇْﻔ ِﺮ ﯾٍَﺪ أَْو ِر ْﺟ ٍﻞ، َوﺗَ ْﻐ ِﻄﯿﱠُﺔ َرأَ ِس َذَﻛ ٍﺮ، َوﻟُْﺒ ُﺴُﻪ‬ ،‫اﻟَﻤ ِﺨﯿ َﻂ إِﱠﻻ َﺳ َﺮا ِوﯾ َﻞ ﻟَِﻌَﺪِم إَِزا ٍر، َو ُﺧﻔﱠْﯿ ِﻦ ﻟَِﻌَﺪِم ﻧَ ْﻌﻠَْﯿ ِﻦ، َواﻟ ﱢﻄﯿ ُﺐ، َوﻗَْﺘ ُﻞ َﺻْﯿِﺪ اﻟﺒَ ﱢﺮ اﻟ َﻮ ْﺣ ِﺸ ﱢﻲ اﻟَﻤﺄَُﻛﻮ ِل‬ ‫َواﻟُﻤﺘَ َﻮﻟﱢِﺪ ِﻣْﻨُﻪ َوِﻣ ْﻦ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه، َو َﻋْﻘُﺪ ﻧَِﻜﺎ ٍح، َو ِﺟَﻤﺎ ٌع، َوُﻣﺒَﺎ َﺷ َﺮٌة ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ُدو َن اﻟﻔَ ْﺮج ِ . َوﻓِﻲ َﺟِﻤﯿ ِﻊ‬ ‫اﻟَﻤ ْﺤ ُﻈﻮ َرا ِت اﻟﻔِْﺪﯾَُﺔ إِﱠﻻ ﻗَْﺘ َﻞ اﻟﻘَ ْﻤ ِﻞ َو َﻋْﻘَﺪ اﻟﻨﱢَﻜﺎ ِح، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟﺒَْﯿ ِﺾ َواﻟ َﺠ َﺮاِد ﻗِﯿَﻤﺘُُﻪ َﻣَﻜﺎﻧَُﻪ، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﻌ َﺮِة أَْو‬
. ‫اﻟ ُﻈْﻔ ِﺮ إِ ْﻃَﻌﺎُم ِﻣ ْﺴِﻜﯿ ٍﻦ، َوﻓِﻲ اﻻِْﺛﻨَْﯿ ِﻦ إِ ْﻃَﻌﺎُم اْﺛﻨَْﯿ ِﻦ، َواﻟ ﱠﻀ ُﺮو َرا ُت ﺗُﺒِﯿ ُﺢ ﻟِﻠُﻤ ْﺤ ِﺮِم اﻟَﻤ ْﺤ ُﻈﻮ َرا ِت َوﯾَْﻔِﺪ ي‬
Expiations It is what is obligatory due to iḥrām or the Ḥaram. The expiation of shaving; removing more than two hairs or nails; applying perfume; wearing fitted clothes; a male covering his head; or a woman covering her face, is to choose between fasting three days, feeding six poor people one mudd [93] of wheat or one-half ṣāʿ of something else, or slaughtering a sheep. The compensation for hunting is to choose between an analogous animal or appraising its value in dirhams and purchasing food sufficient for fitṛ to feed every poor person one mudd of wheat or one-half ṣāʿ of something else; or fasting one day in place of the food for each poor person. For the non-analogous animal, it is between feeding or fasting. If the mutamattiʿ [94] or qārin [95] is unable to procure a sacrificial animal, they must fast three days during ḥajj (making the last of them the day of ʿArafah is best) and then seven days upon their return home. If someone

who is restricted is unable to obtain one, they must fast 10 days and then disengage. It is not required for heedlessly wearing fitted clothing, applying perfume, or covering the head. Every sacrificial animal or feeding belongs to the poor people of the Ḥaram, except for the expiations given for shaving the head, fitted clothing, etc., which are to be distributed wherever their causes are found. Fasting is valid in every place. The blood sacrifice is either one sheep or one-seventh of a camel or cow.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ ِﻓﻲ اﻟِﻔْﺪﯾَِﺔ‬ ،‫َو ِﻫ َﻲ َﻣﺎ ﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﺑِ َﺴﺒَ ِﺐ إِ ْﺣ َﺮاٍم أَْو َﺣ َﺮٍم، ﻓَﯿُ َﺨﯿﱠ ُﺮ ﺑِﻔِْﺪﯾَِﺔ َﺣﻠْ ٍﻖ َوإَِزاﻟَِﺔ أَْﻛﺜَ َﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﻌ َﺮﺗَْﯿ ِﻦ أَْو ُﻇْﻔ َﺮْﯾ ِﻦ، َو ِﻃﯿ ٍﺐ‬ ‫َوﻟُْﺒ ِﺲ َﻣ ِﺨﯿ ٍﻂ، َوﺗَ ْﻐ ِﻄﯿَِﺔ َرأْ ِس َذَﻛ ٍﺮ َو َو ْﺟِﻪ ا ْﻣ َﺮأٍَة ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ ِﺻﯿَﺎِم ﺛََﻼﺛَِﺔ أَﯾﱠﺎٍم أَْو إِ ْﻃَﻌﺎِم ِﺳﺘﱠِﺔ َﻣ َﺴﺎِﻛﯿ َﻦ، ُﻛ ﱠﻞ‬ ‫ِﻣ ْﺴِﻜﯿ ٍﻦ ُﻣﱠﺪ ﺑُ ﱟﺮ، أَْو ﻧِ ْﺼ َﻒ َﺻﺎ ٍع ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه، أ ْو َذْﺑ ِﺢ َﺷﺎة ٍ. َوﻓِﻲ َﺟ َﺰاِء َﺻْﯿٍﺪ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ ِﻣْﺜ ِﻞ ِﻣْﺜﻠِ ﱟﻲ أَْو ﺗَْﻘ ِﻮﯾِﻤِﻪ‬ ‫ﺑَِﺪ َرا ِﻫَﻢ ﯾِ ْﺸﺘَ ِﺮي ﺑَِﻬﺎ َﻃَﻌﺎﻣﺎً ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ ﻓِﻲ ﻓِ ْﻄ َﺮٍة، ﻓَﯿُ ْﻄِﻌُﻢ ُﻛ ﱠﻞ ِﻣ ْﺴِﻜﯿ ٍﻦ ُﻣﱠﺪ ﺑُ ﱟﺮ، أَْو ﻧِ ْﺼ َﻒ َﺻﺎ ٍع ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه، أَْو‬
.ٍ ‫ﯾَ ُﺼﻮُم َﻋ ْﻦ َﻃَﻌﺎِم ُﻛ ﱢﻞ ِﻣ ْﺴِﻜﯿ ٍﻦ ﯾَ ْﻮﻣﺎً، َوﺑَْﯿ َﻦ إِ ْﻃَﻌﺎٍم أَْو ِﺻﯿَﺎٍم ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ِﻣْﺜﻠِ ّﻲ‬ ‫َوإِ ْن َﻋِﺪَم ُﻣﺘََﻤﺘﱢ ٌﻊ أَْو ﻗَﺎ ِر ٌن اﻟَﻬْﺪ َي َﺻﺎَم ﺛََﻼﺛََﺔ أَﯾﱠﺎٍم ﻓِﻲ اﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺞ، َواﻷَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ َﺟ ْﻌ ُﻞ آ ِﺧ ِﺮ َﻫﺎ ﯾَ ْﻮَم َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ َو َﺳْﺒَﻌًﺔ‬ ‫إَِذا َر َﺟ َﻊ إِﻟَﻰ أَْﻫﻠِِﻪ، َواﻟُﻤ ْﺤ َﺼ ُﺮ إَِذا ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺠْﺪُه َﺻﺎَم َﻋ ْﺸ َﺮَة أَﯾﱠﺎٍم، ﺛُﱠﻢ َﺣ ﱠﻞ، َوﺗَ ْﺴﻘُ ُﻂ ﺑِﻨِ ْﺴﯿَﺎ ٍن ﻓِﻲ ﻟُْﺒ ٍﺲ َو ِﻃﯿ ٍﺐ‬ ‫َوﺗَ ْﻐ ِﻄﯿَِﺔ َرأْس ٍ. َوُﻛ ﱡﻞ َﻫْﺪ ٍي أَْو إِ ْﻃَﻌﺎٍم ﻓَﻠَِﻤ َﺴﺎِﻛﯿ ِﻦ اﻟ َﺤ َﺮِم إِﱠﻻ ﻓِْﺪﯾََﺔ أََذى َوﻟُْﺒ ٍﺲ َوﻧَ ْﺤ َﻮ ُﻫَﻤﺎ، ﻓَ َﺤْﯿ ُﺚ ُو ِﺟَﺪ‬
.ٍ ‫َﺳﺒَﺒَُﻬﺎ، َوﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ اﻟ ﱠﺼ ْﻮُم ﺑُِﻜ ﱢﻞ َﻣَﻜﺎ ٍن، َواﻟﱠﺪُم َﺷﺎٌة أَْو ُﺳْﺒ ُﻊ ﺑُْﺪﻧٍَﺔ أَْو ﺑﻘَ َﺮة‬
Appraisal of Game Animals They are of two categories : that which has an analogous livestock animal (which is obligatory and is of two types: the first is what the companions adjudicated which includes ostrich—for which is a camel; zebra, antelope, deer, hartebeest, and ibex—for which is a cow; aardwolf [96] —for which is a sheep; gazelle—for which is a sheep; hyrax and lizard—for which is a kid; jerboa—for which is a four month she-goat; rabbit—for which is a she-kid less than a she-goat; and ḥamām i.e. every type of bird that drinks water and coos—for which there is a sheep) and the second which is what the companions did not adjudicate and should be referred to the judgement of two upright specialists. The second category is that which does not have an analogous type and includes the remaining species of birds, for which is their local value.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ ِﻓﻲ َﺟ َﺰا ِء اﻟ ﱠﺼﯿِﺪ‬ .ُ ‫َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﺿ ْﺮﺑَﺎن ِ: َﻣﺎ ﻟَُﻪ ِﻣْﺜ ٌﻞ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟﻨﱠَﻌِﻢ، ﻓَﯿَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﻓِﯿِﻪ َذﻟِ َﻚ اﻟِﻤْﺜﻞ‬ ‫َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﻧَ ْﻮ َﻋﺎن ِ : أَ َﺣُﺪ ُﻫَﻢ ا : ﻗَ َﻀ ْﺖ ﻓِﯿِﻪ اﻟ ﱠﺼ َﺤﺎﺑَُﺔ، َوِﻣْﻨُﻪ ﻓِﻲ اﻟﻨﱠَﻌﺎَﻣِﺔ ﺑََﺪﻧٌَﺔ، َوﻓِﻲ ِﺣَﻤﺎ ِر اﻟ َﻮ ْﺣ ِﺶ َوﺑَﻘَ ِﺮِه‬
،‫َوأُﯾﱠ ٍﻞ َوﺛَْﯿﺘَ ٍﻞ َو َو ِﻋ ٍﻞ ﺑَﻘَ َﺮٌة، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠﻀﺒُ ِﻊ َﻛْﺒ ٌﺶ‬ ‫َوﻓِﻲ اﻟَﻐ َﺰا ِل َﺷﺎٌة، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟ َﻮْﺑ ِﺮ َواﻟ ﱠﻀ ﱢﺐ َﺟْﺪ ٌي، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟﯿَ ْﺮﺑُﻮ ِع َﺟْﻔ َﺮٌة ﻟََﻬﺎ أَ ْرﺑََﻌُﺔ أَ ْﺷُﻬ ٍﺮ، َوﻓِﻲ اﻷَ ْرﻧَ ِﺐ‬ ‫َﻋﻨَﺎ ٌق ُدو َن اﻟ َﺠـْﻔ َﺮِة، َوﻓِﻲ اﻟ َﺤَﻤﺎم ِ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ُﻛ ﱡﻞ َﻣﺎ َﻋ ﱠﺐ اﻟَﻤﺎَء َو َﻫَﺪ َر، َﺷﺎة ٌ. اﻟﻨﱠﻮ ُع اﻟﺜﱠﺎ ِن ي : َﻣﺎ ﻟَْﻢ‬
.ِ ‫ﺗَْﻘ ِﺾ ﻓِﯿِﻪ اﻟ ﱠﺼ َﺤﺎﺑَُﺔ، َوﯾُ ْﺮ َﺟ ُﻊ ﻓِﯿِﻪ إِﻟَﻰ ﻗَ ْﻮ ِل َﻋْﺪﻟَْﯿ ِﻦ َﺧﺒِﯿ َﺮْﯾﻦ‬ .ُ ‫اﻟ ﱠﻀ ْﺮ ُب اﻟﺜﱠﺎ ِن ي : َﻣﺎ َﻻ ِﻣْﺜ َﻞ ﻟَُﻪ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﺑِﺎﻗِﻲ اﻟ ﱠﻄْﯿ ِﺮ َوﻓِﯿِﻪ ﻗِﯿَﻤﺘُُﻪ َﻣَﻜﺎﻧَﻪ‬

Sanctuary of Makkah & Madinah Hunting in the sanctuary of Makkah is impermissible and its ruling is like hunting while in iḥrām. The following are impermissible to cut trees; grass (even thorns which may cause harm); siwāk, etc.; and leaves (but not dried leaves, sweet grass, truffles, mushrooms, fruit, and whatever is planted by man—including trees).
It is permissible to pasture its grass and benefit from what has died or broken, without human interference, even if it is not completely separated.
A small (per custom) tree warrants a sheep; what is larger warrants a cow. A choice is made between that and its estimated value—the price of which is treated like the recompense of hunting. Grass warrants its market value.
It is disliked remove dirt and rocks, but not zamzam water, from the sanctuary to non-sacred land.
It is recommended to reside in Makkah, which is more virtuous than Madinah. Both good and evil deeds are multiplied in virtuous places and during virtuous times. It is impermissible to hunt in the sanctuary of Madinah and to cut its trees and grass, except for need of fodder and small saddles, etc., which has no recompense.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬

‫َو َﺣ ُﺮَم َﺻْﯿُﺪ َﺣ َﺮِم َﻣﱠﻜ َﺔ، َو ُﺣ ْﻜ ُﻤ ُﻪ ُﺣ ْﻜُﻢ ِﺻﯿِﺪ اِﻹ ْﺣ َﺮاِم، َو َﺣ ُﺮَم َﻗ ْﻄ ُﻊ َﺷ َﺠ ِﺮِه َو َﺣ ِﺸﯿ ِﺸ ِﻪ َﺣﱠﺘﻰ‬ ‫اﻟ َﺸ ْﻮ ِك َوﻟَ ْﻮ َﺿ ﱠﺮ، َواﻟ ﱢﺴ َﻮا ِك َوَﻧ ْﺤ ِﻮِه، َواﻟ َﻮ َر ِق إِﱠﻻ اﻟَﯿﺎِﺑ َﺲ َواِﻹ ْذ ِﺧ َﺮ، َواﻟ َﻜ ْﻤﺄََة َواﻟَﻔْﻘ َﻊ‬
.ِ ‫َواﻟﱠﺜ َﻤ َﺮَة، َو َﻣﺎ َز َر َﻋ ُﻪ آَد ِﻣ ﱞﻲ َﺣﱠﺘﻰ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺸ َﺠﺮ‬

ََ

َْ َ َ

ََْ

. ْ ‫َوُﯾَﺒﺎ ُح َر ْﻋ ُﻲ َﺣ ِﺸﯿ ِﺸ ِﻪ، َواْﻧَﺘَﻔﺎ ٌع ِﺑ َﻤﺎ َزال أ ْو اِْﻧ َﻜ َﺴ َﺮ ِﺑ َﻐْﯿ ِﺮ ِﻓ ْﻌ ِﻞ آَد ِﻣ ﱟﻲ َوﻟ ْﻮ ﻟ ْﻢ َﯾِﺒﻦ‬ ،‫َوُﺗ ْﻀ َﻤ ُﻦ اﻟ ﱠﺸ َﺠ َﺮُة اﻟ ﱠﺼ ِﻐﯿ َﺮُة ُﻋ ْﺮﻓﺎً ِﺑ َﺸﺎٍة، َو َﻣﺎ َﻓ ْﻮَﻗ َﻬﺎ ِﺑَﺒَﻘ َﺮٍة، َوُﯾ َﺨﱠﯿ ُﺮ َﺑْﯿ َﻦ َذﻟِ َﻚ َوَﺑْﯿ َﻦ َﺗْﻘ ِﻮﯾ ِﻤ ِﻪ‬
.ِ ‫َوُﯾْﻔ َﻌ ُﻞ ِﺑِﻘﯿ َﻤِﺘ ِﻪ َﻛ َﺠ َﺰا ِء َﺻْﯿٍﺪ، َو َﺣ ِﺸﯿ ٌﺶ ِﺑِﻘﯿ َﻤِﺘﻪ‬ .َ ‫َو ُﻛ ِﺮَه إِ ْﺧ َﺮا ُج ُﺗ َﺮا ِب اﻟ َﺤ َﺮِم َو ِﺣ َﺠﺎ َرِﺗ ِﻪ إِﻟَﻰ اﻟ ِﺤ ﱢﻞ إِﱠﻻ َﻣﺎ ُء َز ْﻣ َﺰم‬ ‫َوُﺗ ْﺴَﺘ َﺤ ﱡﺐ اﻟ ُﻤ َﺠﺎ َو َرُة ِﺑ َﻤﱠﻜ َﺔ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ أْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ َﻤِﺪﯾَﻨ ِﺔ، َوُﺗ َﻀﺎ َﻋ ُﻒ اﻟ َﺤ َﺴَﻨ ُﺔ َواﻟ ﱠﺴﱢﯿَﺌ ُﺔ ِﺑ َﻤ َﻜﺎ ٍن‬ ‫َو َز َﻣﺎ ٍن َﻓﺎ ِﺿﻞ ٍ . َو َﺣ ُﺮَم َﺻْﯿُﺪ َﺣ َﺮِم اﻟ َﻤِﺪﯾَﻨ ِﺔ، َوَﻗ ْﻄ ُﻊ َﺷ َﺠ ِﺮِه َو َﺣ ِﺸﯿ ِﺸ ِﻪ ﻟِ َﻐْﯿ ِﺮ َﺣﺎ َﺟ ِﺔ َﻋﻠَ ٍﻒ‬
.َ ‫َوَﻗَﺘ ٍﺐ َوَﻧ ْﺤ ِﻮ ِﻫ َﻤﺎ َوَﻻ َﺟ َﺰاء‬
Entering Makkah It is recommended to enter during the day from its peak i.e. the Gap of Kadāʾ, and to exit from its base i.e. the Gap of Kudā. The masjid should be entered from the door of Banī Shaybah. Whoever sees the Kaʿbah is to raise their hands and say what has been narrated followed by ṭawāf for ʿumrah as a mutamattiʿ or for arrival as a mufrid or qārin. Men should tuck the middle of the top wrap under their right shoulder in all seven circuits, unless carrying someone excused.
It is begun at the black stone, facing it (or a part thereof) with the entire body, then it is touched with the right hand, kissed, and prostrated upon. If that is difficult, it is touched with the hand and kissed; thronging should be avoided. If that is difficult, it is touched with something which is then kissed. If that is difficult, a gesture with the hand or something is made (without kissing it) while directing the face to it and saying what is narrated.
Then with the Kaʿbah on the left side, those coming from far away jog with short strides in the ṭawāf. Upon completion, two rakʿahs are prayed, which are best done behind al-Maqām [97] ; an obligatory prayer will suffice instead. Then the stone is touched, exit for saʿī [98] is made from the door of Ṣafā, which is climbed until the Kaʿbah is seen, then takbīr is made three times and what has been narrated is said. Then they descend, walking to the first marker, and then run until they reach the next marker. They then walk and climb Marwah and say what they did on Ṣafā.
Then they walk back and run, where running is prescribed, to Ṣafā; doing it seven times. Each departure from Ṣafā is counted as one lap and each

‫.‪return to Ṣafā is counted as another. It begins at Ṣafā and ends at Marwah‬‬ ‫.‪Beginning from Marwah does not count as a lap‬‬
‫َﺑﺎ ُب ُد ُﺧﻮ ِل َﻣﱠﻜ َﺔ‬ ‫ُﯾ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﻧ َﻬﺎراً ِﻣ ْﻦ أَ ْﻋَﻼ َﻫﺎ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺛِﻨﱠﯿ ِﺔ َﻛَﺪا ٍء، َو ُﺧ ُﺮو ٌج ِﻣ ْﻦ أَ ْﺳَﻔﻠِ َﻬﺎ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺛِﻨﱠﯿ ِﺔ ُﻛَﺪى، َوُد ُﺧﻮ ُل‬ ‫اﻟ َﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠِﺪ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺑﺎ ِب َﺑِﻨﻲ َﺷْﯿَﺒ َﺔ، َﻓﺈَِذا َرأَى اﻟَﺒْﯿ َﺖ َرَﻓ َﻊ َﯾَﺪْﯾ ِﻪ َوَﻗﺎ َل َﻣﺎ َو َرَد، ُﺛﱠﻢ َﯾ ُﻄﻮ ُف ُﻣَﺘ َﻤﱢﺘ ٌﻊ‬ ‫ﻟِْﻠ ُﻌ ْﻤ َﺮِة َو َﻣْﻔ ِﺮٌد َوَﻗﺎ ِر ٌن ﻟِْﻠُﻘُﺪوِم َو ُﻫ َﻮ اﻟ ُﻮ ُروُد، ِوِﯾ ْﻀ َﻄِﺒ ُﻊ َﻏْﯿ ُﺮ َﺣﺎ ِﻣ ِﻞ َﻣ ْﻌُﺬو ٍر ِﻓﻲ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ‬
‫أُ ْﺳُﺒﻮ ِﻋ ِﻪ،‬ ‫َوَﯾْﺒَﺘِﺪُﺋ ُﻪ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ َﺤ َﺠ ِﺮ ا َﻷ ْﺳ َﻮِد َﻓُﯿ َﺤﺎِذﯾ ِﻪ أَ ْو َﺑ ْﻌ َﻀ ُﻪ ِﺑ ُﻜ ﱢﻞ َﺑَﺪِﻧ ِﻪ، َوِﯾ ْﺴَﺘﻠِ ُﻤ ُﻪ ِﺑَﯿِﺪِه اﻟُﯿ ْﻤَﻨﻰ َوُﯾَﻘﱢﺒﻠُ ُﻪ‬ ‫ِوَﯾ ْﺴ ُﺠُﺪ َﻋﻠَْﯿ ِﻪ، َﻓﺈِ ْن َﺷ ﱠﻖ ﻟَ ْﻢ ُﯾ َﺰا ِﺣ ْﻢ، َوا ْﺳَﺘﻠَ َﻤ ُﻪ ِﺑَﯿِﺪِه َوَﻗﱠﺒﻠَ َﻬﺎ، َﻓﺈِ ْن َﺷ ﱠﻖ َﻓِﺒ َﺸ ْﻲ ٍء َوَﻗﱠﺒﻠَ ُﻪ، َﻓﺈِ ْن َﺷ ﱠﻖ‬
‫أَ َﺷﺎ َر إِﻟَْﯿ ِﻪ ِﺑَﯿِﺪِه أَ ْو ِﺑ َﺸ ْﻲ ٍء َوَﻻ ُﯾَﻘﱢﺒﻠُ ُﻪ، َوا ْﺳَﺘْﻘَﺒﻠَ ُﻪ ِﺑ َﻮ ْﺟ ِﻬ ِﻪ َوَﻗﺎ َل َﻣﺎ َو َرد َ.‬ ‫ُﺛﱠﻢ َﯾ ْﺠ َﻌ ُﻞ اﻟَﺒْﯿ َﺖ َﻋ ْﻦ َﯾ َﺴﺎ ِرِه، َوَﯾ ْﺮ ُﻣ ُﻞ ا ُﻷُﻓِﻘ ﱡﻲ ِﻓﻲ َﻫَﺬا اﻟ ﱠﻄ َﻮا ِف، َﻓﺈَِذا َﻓ َﺮ َغ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ َر ْﻛ َﻌَﺘْﯿ ِﻦ،‬ ‫َوا َﻷْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ َﻛ ْﻮُﻧ ُﻬ َﻤﺎ َﺧْﻠ َﻒ اﻟ َﻤَﻘﺎِم، َوُﺗ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ َﻣ ْﻜُﺘﻮَﺑٌﺔ َﻋْﻨ ُﻬ َﻤﺎ، ُﺛﱠﻢ َﯾ ْﺴَﺘﻠُِﻢ اﻟ َﺤ َﺠ َﺮ َوَﯾ ْﺨ ُﺮ ُج ﻟِْﻠ َﺴ ْﻌ ِﻲ‬ ‫ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺑﺎ َب اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻔﺎ َﻓَﯿ ْﺮَﻗﺎُه َﺣﱠﺘﻰ َﯾ َﺮى اﻟَﺒْﯿ َﺖ َﻓُﯿ َﻜﱢﺒ ُﺮ َﺛَﻼﺛﺎً َوَﯾُﻘﻮ ُل َﻣﺎ َو َرَد، ُﺛﱠﻢ َﯾْﻨ ِﺰ ُل َﻣﺎ ِﺷﯿﺎً إِﻟَﻰ‬
‫اﻟ َﻌﻠَِﻢ ا َﻷﱠو ِل َﻓَﯿ ْﺴ َﻌﻰ َﺳ ْﻌﯿﺎً َﺷِﺪﯾﺪاً إِﻟَﻰ اﻟ َﻌﻠَِﻢ اﻵ َﺧ ِﺮ،‬ ‫ُﺛﱠﻢ َﯾ ْﻤ ِﺸﻲ َوَﯾ ْﺮَﻗﻰ اﻟ َﻤ ْﺮ َوَة َوَﯾُﻘﻮ ُل َﻣﺎ َﻗﺎﻟَ ُﻪ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻔﺎ، ُﺛﱠﻢ ِﯾْﻨ ِﺰ ُل َﻓَﯿ ْﻤ ِﺸﻲ ِﻓﻲ َﻣ ْﻮ ِﺿ ِﻊ َﻣ ْﺸِﯿ ِﻪ‬ ‫َوَﯾ ْﺴ َﻌﻰ ِﻓﻲ َﻣ ْﻮ ِﺿ ِﻊ َﺳ ْﻌِﯿ ِﻪ إِﻟَﻰ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻔﺎ، َﯾْﻔ َﻌﻠُ ُﻪ َﺳْﺒﻌﺎً، َوَﯾ ْﺤ َﺴ ُﺐ َذ َﻫﺎَﺑ ُﻪ َﺳ ْﻌَﯿ ًﺔ َو ُر ُﺟﻮ َﻋ ُﻪ َﺳ ْﻌَﯿ ًﺔ،‬
‫َﯾْﻔَﺘِﺘـ ُﺢ ِﺑﺎﻟ ﱠﺼَﻔﺎ َوَﯾ ْﺨِﺘُﻢ ِﺑﺎﻟ َﻤ ْﺮ َوِة، َﻓﺈِ ْن َﺑَﺪأَ ِﺑﺎﻟ َﻤ ْﺮ َوِة ﻟَ ْﻢ ُﯾ ْﺤَﺘ َﺴ ْﺐ ِﺑَﺬﻟِ َﻚ اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﻮط ِ.‬
‫‪Description of Ḥajj & ʿUmrah‬‬ ‫‪It is recommended for those in Makkah, from outside the sanctuary, to‬‬ ‫‪make iḥrām for ḥajj on the day of tarwiyah (the 8th of Dhul-Ḥijjah) and to‬‬ ‫‪sleep in Minā. After the sun rises, they leave for, and stay in, Namirah‬‬ ‫‪until the zawāl. Then they move to ʿArafah, which is entirely a place of‬‬ ‫‪standing except Baṭna ʿUranah, i.e. from the mount overseeing ʿArafah to‬‬ ‫‪its opposing mountains and the walls of Banī ʿĀmir. They are to combine‬‬ ‫.‪ẓuhr and ʿaṣr at the time of ẓuhr‬‬ ‫,‪It is recommended to stay their mounted (unlike the remaining rites)‬‬ ‫‪while facing the qiblah close to the boulders and Mt. Raḥmah, which is not‬‬ ‫‪legislated to climb on. They raise their hands and make abundant‬‬ ‫.‪supplication from what has been narrated‬‬

The time of ‘standing’ is from fajr of ʿArafah until the day of sacrifice’s fajr. Afterwards they tranquilly go, post-sunset, to Muzdalifah and combine maghrib and ʿishāʾ at the time of ʿishāʾ and stay there for the night. After praying the morning prayer, they go to Mash'ar al-Ḥarām [99] , climb it and stand there praising, unifying, and extolling Allāh, supplicating from what has narrated, and reciting the two verses 198 and 199, “But when you depart from ʿArafah, remember Allāh at al-Mash'ar al-Ḥaram…”.
They then supplicate until the light of dawn and proceed to Minā. Upon reaching Muḥassir [100] , they quickly go a stone’s throw and take 70 pebbles (bigger than chick-peas but smaller than hazelnuts) for stoning, from wherever they wish. Taking them from the sanctuary, the weeds, or to breaking them is disliked
It is not recommended to wash them. Pebbles soiled with najāsah will suffice, though they are disliked. They then stone only Jamarat al-ʿAqabah with seven pebbles.
It is a prerequisite that they throw them one after the other and not merely place them down. With each pebble, they raise their right arm until the white of the armpit is seen and make takbīr. They then slaughter and shave or trim all their hair—not necessarily every single hair. Women are to trim the amount of a fingertip.
At this point, everything is now permitted besides women.
Then they go to Makkah and perform the visitation ṭawāf, a pillar, and make saʿī if they had not already done so. After concluding this, everything becomes permissible. It is recommended to drink zamzam water for whatever is desired, to fill the belly and sprinkle it on the body and clothes, and to supplicate from what is narrated.

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ ِﻓﻲ ِﺻَﻔِﺔ اﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺞ َواﻟُﻌ ْﻤ َﺮِة‬ ‫ﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ﻟُِﻤ ِﺤ ﱟﻞ ﺑَِﻤﱠﻜَﺔ اِﻹ ْﺣ َﺮاُم ﺑِﺎﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺞ ﯾَ ْﻮَم اﻟﺘﱠ ْﺮ ِوﯾَِﺔ َو ُﻫ َﻮ اﻟﺜﱠﺎِﻣ ُﻦ ِﻣ ْﻦ ِذي اﻟ ِﺤ ﱠﺠِﺔ، َواﻟَﻤﺒِﯿ ُﺖ ﺑِِﻤﻨَﻰ، ﻓَﺈَِذا َﻃﻠََﻌ ْﺖ‬ ‫اﻟ ﱠﺸ ْﻤ ُﺲ َﺳﺎ َر ﻓَﺄَﻗَﺎَم إِﻟَﻰ اﻟ ﱠﺰ َوا ِل، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَﺄَﺗِﻲ َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ َوُﻛﻠﱡَﻬﺎ َﻣ ْﻮﻗِ ٌﻒ إِﱠﻻ ﺑَ ْﻄ َﻦ ُﻋ َﺮﻧََﺔ، َو ُﻫ َﻮ اﻟ َﺠﺒَ ُﻞ اﻟُﻤ ْﺸ ِﺮ ُف‬ ‫َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ إِﻟَﻰ اﻟﺞِﺑَﺎ ِل اﻟُﻤﻘَﺎﺑِﻠَِﺔ ﻟَُﻪ إِﻟَﻰ َﻣﺎ ﯾَﻠِﻲ َﺣ َﻮاﺋِ َﻂ ﺑَﻨِﻲ َﻋﺎِﻣ ٍﺮ، َوﯾَ ْﺠَﻤ ُﻊ ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟ ﱡﻈ ْﻬ ِﺮ َواﻟَﻌ ْﺼ ِﺮ‬
.ً ‫ﺗَْﻘِﺪﯾﻤﺎ‬

ُْ َ

ََ َ ْ

َ ً ُُ ُ

‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ُوﻗُﻮﻓُُﻪ َراِﻛﺒﺎً ﺑِ ِﺨَﻼ ِف َﺳﺎﺋِـ ِﺮ اﻟَﻤﻨَﺎ ِﺳ ِﻚ، ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَْﻘﺒِﻞ اﻟﻘِْﺒﻠﺔ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ اﻟ ﱠﺼ ْﺨ َﺮا ِت َو َﺟﺒَ ِﻞ اﻟ ﱠﺮ ْﺣَﻤِﺔ، َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﺸ َﺮ ُع‬ ‫ُﺻُﻌﻮُدُه، َوﯾَ ْﺮﻓَ ُﻊ ﯾََﺪْﯾِﻪ، َوﯾُ ْﻜﺜِ ُﺮ اﻟﱡﺪ َﻋﺎَء ﺑَِﻤﺎ َو َرد َ. َو َوْﻗ ُﺖ اﻟ ُﻮﻗُﻮ ِف ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻓَ ْﺠ ِﺮ َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ إِﻟَﻰ ﻓَ ْﺠ ِﺮ ﯾَ ْﻮِم اﻟﻨﱠ ْﺤ ِﺮ،‬ ‫ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَْﺪﻓَ ُﻊ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟُﻐ ُﺮو ِب إِﻟَﻰ ُﻣ ْﺰَدﻟِﻔََﺔ ﺑ َﺴِﻜﯿﻨٍَﺔ، َوﯾَﺠَﻤ ُﻊ ﻓِﯿَﻬﺎ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟِﻌ َﺸﺎﺋَْﯿ ِﻦ ﺗَْﺄ ِﺧﯿﺮاً َوﯾَﺒِﯿ ُﺖ ﺑَِﻬﺎ، ﻓَﺈَِذا َﺻﻠﱠﻰ‬ ‫اﻟ ﱡﺼْﺒ َﺢ أَﺗَﻰ اﻟَﻤ ْﺸَﻌ َﺮ اﻟ َﺤ َﺮاَم، ﻓَ َﺮﻗَﺎُه َو َوﻗَ َﻒ ِﻋْﻨَﺪُه، َو َﺣِﻤَﺪ ا ﱠﷲَ ﺗََﻌﺎﻟَﻰ َو َﻫﻠﱠَﻞ َوَﻛﺒﱠ َﺮ، َوَد َﻋﺎ ﺑَِﻤﺎ َو َرَد َوﻗَ َﺮأ َ‬
‫: ( ﻓَﺈَِذا أَﻓَ ْﻀﺘُْﻢ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻋ َﺮﻓَﺎ ٍت ﻓَﺎْذُﻛ ُﺮوا ا ﱠﷲَ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ اﻟَْﻤ ْﺸَﻌ ِﺮ اﻟْ َﺤ َﺮام ِ) [ اﻟﺒﻘﺮ ة : ‪ [198‬اﻵﯾَﺘَْﯿﻦ ِ.‬
‫َوَﯾ ْﺪ ُﻋﻮ َﺣﱠﺘﻰ ُﯾ ْﺴِﻔ َﺮ ِﺟ‪‬ﺪا ُﺛﱠﻢ َﯾ ْﺪَﻓ ُﻊ إِﻟَﻰ ِﻣَﻨﻰ، َﻓﺈَِذا َﺑﻠَ َﻎ ُﻣ َﺤ ﱢﺴﺮاً أَ ْﺳ َﺮ َع َر ْﻣَﯿ َﺔ َﺣ َﺠ ٍﺮ، َوأَ َﺧَﺬ‬ ‫َﺣ َﺼﻰ اﻟِﺠ َﻤﺎ ِر َﺳْﺒ ِﻌﯿ َﻦ َﺣ َﺼﺎًة أَ ْﻛَﺒ َﺮ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ ِﺤﱢﻤ ِﺺ َوُدو َن اﻟُﺒْﻨُﺪ ِق، ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺣْﯿ َﺚ َﺷﺎ َء، َو ُﻛ ِﺮَه ِﻣ َﻦ‬
‫اﻟ َﺤ َﺮِم، َواﻟ ُﺤ ﱢﺶ، َوَﺗ ْﻜ ِﺴﯿ ُﺮُه، َوَﻻ ُﯾ َﺴ ﱡﻦ َﻏ ْﺴﻠُ ُﻪ، َوُﺗ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ َﺣ َﺼﺎةٌ َﻧ ِﺠ َﺴٌﺔ َﻣ َﻊ اﻟ َﻜ َﺮا َﻫﺔ ِ.‬ ‫َﻓَﯿ ْﺮ ِﻣﻲ َﺟ ْﻤ َﺮَة اﻟ َﻌَﻘَﺒ ِﺔ َو ْﺣَﺪ َﻫﺎ ِﺑ َﺴْﺒ ٍﻊ، َوُﯾ ْﺸَﺘ َﺮ ُط اﻟ ﱠﺮ ْﻣ ُﻲ َﻓَﻼ ُﯾ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ اﻟ َﻮ ْﺿ ُﻊ، َو َﻛ ْﻮُﻧ ُﻪ َوا ِﺣَﺪًة‬ ‫َﺑﻌَﺪ أُ ْﺧ َﺮى، َﯾ ْﺮَﻓ ُﻊ ُﯾ ْﻤَﻨﺎُه َﻣ َﻊ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َﺣ َﺼﺎٍة َﺣﱠﺘﻰ ُﯾ َﺮى َﺑَﯿﺎ ُض إِْﺑ ِﻄ ِﻪ، َوُﯾ َﻜﱢﺒ ُﺮ َﻣ َﻊ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َﺣ َﺼﺎٍة، ُﺛﱠﻢ‬ ‫َﯾْﻨ َﺤ ُﺮ َوَﯾ ْﺤﻠِ ُﻖ أَ ْو ُﯾَﻘ ﱢﺼ ُﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺟ ِﻤﯿ ِﻊ َﺷ ْﻌ ِﺮِه، َﻻ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻛ ﱢﻞ َﺷ ْﻌ َﺮٍة ِﺑ َﻌْﯿِﻨ َﻬﺎ، َواﻟ َﻤ ْﺮأَُة ُﺗَﻘ ﱢﺼ ُﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ‬
‫َﺷ ْﻌ ِﺮ َﻫﺎ َﻗ ْﺪ َر أْﻧ ُﻤﻠَ ٍﺔ،‬ ‫ُﺛﱠﻢ َﻗ ْﺪ َﺣ ﱠﻞ ُﻛ ﱠﻞ َﺷ ْﻲ ٍء إِﱠﻻ اﻟﱢﻨ َﺴﺎ َء، ُﺛﱠﻢ ُﯾِﻔﯿ ُﺾ إِﻟَﻰ َﻣﱠﻜ َﺔ َﻓَﯿ ُﻄﻮ ُف َﻃ َﻮا َف اﻟ ﱢﺰَﯾﺎ َرِة اﻟﱠِﺬي ُﻫ َﻮ‬
‫ُر ْﻛ ٌﻦ، ُﺛﱠﻢ َﯾ ْﺴ َﻌﻰ إِ ْن ﻟَ ْﻢ َﯾ ُﻜ ْﻦ َﺳ َﻌﻰ، َوَﻗ ْﺪ َﺣ ﱠﻞ ﻟَ ُﻪ ُﻛ ﱡﻞ َﺷ ْﻲء ٍ.‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ أَ ْن َﯾ ْﺸ َﺮ َب ِﻣ ْﻦ َز ْﻣ َﺰَم ﻟِ َﻤﺎ أَ َﺣ ﱠﺐ، َوِﯾَﺘ َﻀﻠﱠ ُﻊ َوَﯾ ُﺮ ﱡش َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺑَﺪِﻧ ِﻪ َوَﺛ ْﻮِﺑ ِﻪ َوَﯾ ْﺪ ُﻋﻮ ِﺑ َﻤﺎ َو َرد َ‬
‫.‬
‫‪Minā & Madīnah‬‬ ‫‪They then return, on the day of naḥr [101] , to Minā and pray ẓuhr, sleep‬‬ ‫‪there three nights, and during the days of tashrīq they stone the three‬‬ ‫‪jamarāts with seven pebbles each. Stoning is not valid unless done during‬‬ ‫‪the day after the zawāl; except by water-bearers and shepherds. If stoning‬‬ ‫‪was performed at night or before the zawāl it would not be valid. It is‬‬ ‫.‪recommended to do it before ẓuhr prayer‬‬ ‫‪The farewell ṭawāf is obligatory and is to be done by everyone wishing to‬‬ ‫‪leave Makkah. Afterwards, they stop at the multazam (between the corner‬‬ ‫‪and the door) and cling to it with their entire body, supplicating with what‬‬ ‫‪is narrated. Women experiencing menstruation and postpartum bleeding‬‬ ‫.‪are to supplicate at the door of the masjid‬‬ ‫‪It is recommended to enter the House unarmed and without khuffs or‬‬ ‫.‪sandals‬‬

It is recommended to visit the Prophet’s grave (peace be upon him) and the graves of his two companions   . They should greet him with salām while facing him and then turn toward the qiblah with the house—impermissible to make ṭawāf around—on the left and supplicate. The manner of ʿumrah for those in the sanctuary is to make iḥrām from the closest non-sacred area. Those closer than the miqāt do so from their home, otherwise it is made from it. It is permissible to make it numerous times in one year and is best done in the months besides those of ḥajj; Ramaḍān is most virtuous.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَ ْﺮ ِﺟ ُﻊ ﻓَﯿُ َﺼﻠﱢﻲ ُﻇ ْﻬ َﺮ ﯾَ ْﻮَم اﻟﻨﱠ ْﺤ ِﺮ ﺑِِﻤﻨَﻰ، َوﯾَﺒِﯿ ُﺖ ﺑَِﻬﺎ ﺛََﻼ َث ﻟَﯿَﺎ ٍل، َوﯾَ ْﺮِﻣﻲ اﻟ َﺠَﻤ َﺮا ِت اﻟﺜََﻼ َث ﺑَِﻬﺎ أَﯾﱠﺎَم‬ ‫اﻟﺘﱠ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ ِﻖ، ُﻛ ﱠﻞ َﺟ ْﻤ َﺮٍة ﺑِ َﺴْﺒ ِﻊ َﺣ َﺼﯿَﺎ ٍت، َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ َر ْﻣ ُﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ُﺳﻘَﺎٍة َو ُر َﻋﺎٍة إِﱠﻻ ﻧََﻬﺎراً ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟ ﱠﺰ َوا ِل، ﻓَﺈِ ْن‬
.ِ ‫َرَﻣﻰ ﻟَْﯿ ًﻼ أَْو ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ اﻟ ﱠﺰ َوا ِل ﻟَْﻢ ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰْﺋُﻪ، َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻗَْﺒ َﻞ َﺻَﻼِة اﻟ ﱡﻈ ْﻬﺮ‬ ‫َو َﻃ َﻮا ُف اﻟ َﻮَدا ِع َوا ِﺟ ٌﺐ ﯾَْﻔَﻌﻠُُﻪ ُﻛ ﱡﻞ َﻣ ْﻦ أََراَد اﻟ ُﺨ ُﺮو َج ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣﱠﻜَﺔ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾَﻘِ ُﻒ ﻓِﻲ اﻟُﻤﻠْﺘَ َﺰِم ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟ ﱡﺮ ْﻛ ِﻦ َواﻟﺒَﺎ ِب‬
.ِ ‫ُﻣﻠْ ِﺼﻘﺎً ﺑِِﻪ َﺟِﻤﯿَﻌُﻪ َدا ِﻋﯿﺎً ﺑَِﻤﺎ َو َرَد، َوﺗَْﺪ ُﻋﻮ اﻟ َﺤﺎﺋِ ُﺾ َواﻟﻨﱡﻔَ َﺴﺎُء َﻋﻠَﻰ ﺑَﺎ ِب اﻟَﻤ ْﺴ ِﺠﺪ‬ .ٍ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ُد ُﺧﻮﻟُُﻪ اﻟﺒَْﯿ َﺖ ﺑَِﻼ ُﺧ ﱟﻒ َوَﻻ ﻧَ ْﻌ ٍﻞ َوَﻻ ِﺳَﻼح‬
‫َوﺗُ ْﺴﺘَ َﺤ ﱡﺐ ِزﯾَﺎ َرُة ﻗَْﺒ ِﺮ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ﱢﻲ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ َوﻗَْﺒ َﺮ ْي َﺻﺎ ِﺣﺒَْﯿِﻪ   ، ﻓَﯿُ َﺴﻠﱢُﻢ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَْﻘﺒِ ًﻼ ﻟَُﻪ، ﺛُﱠﻢ‬ . ‫ﯾَ ْﺴﺘَْﻘﺒِ ُﻞ اﻟﻘِْﺒﻠََﺔ َوﯾَ ْﺠَﻌ ُﻞ اﻟ ِﺤ ْﺠ َﺮَة َﻋ ْﻦ ﯾَ َﺴﺎ ِرِه َوﯾَْﺪ ُﻋﻮ، َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم اﻟ ﱠﻄ َﻮا َف ﺑَِﻪ ا‬
‫َو ِﺻﻔَُﺔ اﻟُﻌ ْﻤ َﺮِة أَ ْن ﯾُ ْﺤ ِﺮَم ﺑَِﻬﺎ َﻣ ْﻦ ﺑِﺎﻟ َﺤ َﺮِم ِﻣ ْﻦ أَْدﻧَﻰ اﻟ ِﺤ ﱢﻞ، َو َﻏْﯿ ُﺮُه ِﻣ ْﻦ َد َوْﯾ َﺮِة أَْﻫﻠِِﻪ إِ ْن َﻛﺎ َن ُدو َن ِﻣﯿﻘَﺎ ٍت‬ .ُ ‫َوإِﱠﻻ ﻓَِﻤْﻨُﻪ، َوَﻻ ﺑَﺄَ َس ﺑَِﻬﺎ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠﺴﻨَِﺔ ِﻣ َﺮاراً، َو ِﻫ َﻲ ﻓِﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ أَ ْﺷُﻬ ِﺮ اﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺞ، َوﻓِﻲ َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن أَْﻓ َﻀﻞ‬
Pillars & Obligations of Ḥajj Ḥajj has four pillars which are: iḥrām; wuqūf [102] ; ṭawāf; and saʿī. It has seven obligations which are: iḥrām from the miqāt; wuqūf until sunset (for those who stay in the day); staying in Muzdalifah until after midnight (for those who arrived before); staying overnight in Minā during the nights of tashrīq; stoning in sequence; shaving or trimming; and making the farewell ṭawāf. ʿUmrah has three pillars which are: iḥrām; ṭawāf; and saʿī. It has two obligations which are: making iḥrām from the miqāt; and shaving or trimming.

The recommended acts include the following: staying overnight at Minā on the night of ʿArafah; arrival ṭawāf; short-stride jogging; and tucking the top wrap under the right arm, etc. Ḥajj is not complete if a pillar is abandoned. Whoever abandons an obligation must offer a blood sacrifice and their ḥajj will be valid. Whoever abandons a recommended act is not required to do anything. Whoever misses the wuqūf at ʿArafah has missed the ḥajj and disengages to ʿumrah (which does not fulfill the obligatory ʿumrah) and slaughters if they did not make a condition. They are required to make it up the following year. Whoever is prevented from the Kaʿbah, even if after the wuqūf or during ʿumrah, is obliged to slaughter the sacrificial animal with the intention of disengagement. If it is not available, they must fast 10 days with an intention [103] , thus disengaging without a penalty of feeding. Whoever is prevented from ʿArafah during ḥajj is to disengage to ʿumrah without requirement of a blood sacrifice.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ .ٌ ‫أَ ْرَﻛﺎ ُن اﻟ َﺤ ﱢﺞ أَ ْرﺑََﻌﺔ ٌ: إِ ْﺣ َﺮاٌم، َو ُوﻗُﻮ ٌف، َو َﻃ َﻮا ٌف، َو َﺳ ْﻌﻲ‬ ‫َو َوا ِﺟﺒَﺎﺗُُﻪ َﺳْﺒَﻌﺔ ٌ : اِﻹ ْﺣ َﺮاُم ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟِﻤﯿﻘَﺎ ِت، َو ُوﻗُﻮ ُف َﻣ ْﻦ َوﻗَ َﻒ ﻧََﻬﺎراً إِﻟَﻰ اﻟُﻐ ُﺮو ِب، َواﻟَﻤﺒِﯿ ُﺖ ﺑُِﻤ ْﺰَدﻟِﻔَﺔ‬ ‫إِﻟَﻰ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ ﻧِ ْﺼ ِﻒ اﻟﻠﱠْﯿ ِﻞ إِ ْن َواﻓَﺎ َﻫﺎ ﻗَْﺒﻠَُﻪ، َواﻟَﻤﺒِﯿ ُﺖ ﺑِِﻤﻨَﻰ ﻟَﯿَﺎﻟِﻲ اﻟﺘﱠ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ ِﻖ، َواﻟ ﱠﺮ ْﻣ ُﻲ ُﻣ َﺮﺗﱠﺒﺎً، َواﻟ َﺤﻠْ ُﻖ أَْو‬
.ِ ‫اﻟﺘﱠْﻘ ِﺼﯿ ُﺮ، َو َﻃ َﻮا ُف اﻟ َﻮَداع‬ .ٌ ‫َوأَ ْرَﻛﺎ ُن اﻟُﻌ ْﻤ َﺮِة ﺛََﻼﺛَﺔ ٌ: إِ ْﺣ َﺮاٌم، َو َﻃ َﻮا ٌف، َو َﺳ ْﻌﻲ‬ .ُ ‫َو َوا ِﺟﺒَﺎﺗَُﻬﺎ َﺷْﯿﺌَﺎن ِ: اِﻹ ْﺣ َﺮاُم ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟِﻤﯿﻘَﺎ ِت، َواﻟ َﺤﻠْ ُﻖ أَْو اﻟﺘﱠْﻘ ِﺼﯿﺮ‬ ‫َواﻟَﻤ ْﺴﻨُﻮ ُن َﻛﺎﻟَﻤﺒِﯿ ِﺖ ﺑِِﻤﻨَﻰ ﻟَْﯿﻠََﺔ َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ، َو َﻃ َﻮا ُف اﻟﻘُُﺪوِم، َواﻟ ﱠﺮَﻣ ُﻞ، َواِﻻ ْﺿ ِﻄﺒَﺎ ُع َوﻧَ ْﺤ ُﻮ َذﻟِﻚ َ. ﻓََﻤ ْﻦ ﺗَ َﺮ َك‬ ‫ُر ْﻛﻨﺎً ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَﺘِﱠﻢ َﺣ ﱡﺠُﻪ إِﱠﻻ ﺑِِﻪ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﺗَ َﺮ َك َوا ِﺟﺒﺎً ﻓََﻌﻠَْﯿِﻪ َدٌم َو َﺣ ﱡﺠُﻪ َﺻ ِﺤﯿ ٌﺢ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﺗَ َﺮ َك َﻣ ْﺴﻨُﻮﻧﺎً ﻓََﻼ َﺷ ْﻲَء‬ ‫َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﻓَﺎﺗَُﻪ اﻟ ُﻮﻗُﻮ ُف ﺑَِﻌ َﺮﻓََﺔ ﻓَﺎﺗَُﻪ اﻟ َﺤ ﱡﺞ، َوﺗَ َﺤـﻠﱠَﻞ ﺑُِﻌ ْﻤ َﺮٍة، َوَﻻ ﺗُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ َﻋ ْﻦ ُﻋ ْﻤ َﺮِة اِﻹ ْﺳَﻼِم، َو َﻫَﺪى إِ ْن‬
.ِ ‫ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَُﻜ ْﻦ اِ ْﺷﺘَ َﺮ َط، َوﻗَ َﻀﻰ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟَﻌﺎِم اﻟﻘَﺎﺑِﻞ‬ ‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ ُﻣﻨِ َﻊ اﻟﺒَْﯿ َﺖ َوﻟَْﻮ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ اﻟ ُﻮﻗُﻮ ِف أَْو ﻓِﻲ ُﻋ ْﻤ َﺮٍة َذﺑَ َﺢ َﻫْﺪﯾﺎً ﺑِﻨِﯿﱠِﺔ اﻟﺘَ َﺤﻠﱡِﻞ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑﺎً، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻟَْﻢ ﯾَ ِﺠْﺪ َﺻﺎَم َﻋ َﺸ َﺮَة‬
.ِ ‫أَﯾﱠﺎٍم ﺑِﺎﻟﻨﱢﯿﱠِﺔ َو َﺣ ﱠﻞ، َوَﻻ إِ ْﻃَﻌﺎَم ﻓِﯿِﻪ، َوَﻣ ْﻦ ُﺻﱠﺪ َﻋ ْﻦ َﻋ َﺮﻓََﺔ ﻓِﻲ َﺣ ﱟﺞ ﺗَ َﺤـﻠﱠَﻞ ﺑُِﻌ ْﻤ َﺮٍة َوَﻻ َدَم َﻋﻠَْﯿﻪ‬
Hady, Uḍḥiyah & ʿAqīqah The hady is livestock, etc., which is offered to the sanctuary because it is offered to Allāh. The uḍḥiyah is an eligible camel, cow, or sheep that is slaughtered during the days of naḥr, for the ʿEid [104] , as an act of devotion

to Allāh. It is an emphasized recommended act and obligatory due to an oath. The most virtuous is a camel, followed by a cow, and then a sheep. It is not valid with other animals. One sheep is sufficient for a man, his dependents, and family. A camel or cow is sufficient for seven and is considered a slaughter on their behalf. One sheep is better than oneseventh of a camel or cow and seven sheep are better than one of the others.
It is not valid except with a six-month-old male sheep or a thaniy of something else. A thaniy camel is a five-year-old and a thaniy cow is a two-year-old. The emaciated, clearly one-eyed, hobbled, or one missing its front teeth, most of its ear, or horn, will not suffice.
It is recommended to slaughter a camel, standing with its left leg bound, by puncturing the pit between its neck and sternum. The slaughtering of a cow and sheep is done, laying on their left side, while facing the qiblah. It is obligatory to mention Allāh’s name at the onset of slaughter. Takbīr is made and the following is said, “O Allāh this is from You and for You”.
The time to slaughter an uḍḥiyah, oath-hady or voluntary sacrifice, mutʿah, and qirān, is after the earliest ʿEid prayer of the area (or its equivalent for those who do not pray [105] ). If the prayer is missed (due to the zawāl), slaughter is to commence after it and continue until the second day of tashrīq. The time to slaughter an obligatory hady is upon committing the unlawful.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ ِﻓﻲ اﻟ َﻬْﺪ ِي َواﻷُ ْﺿ ِﺤﯿَِﺔ َواﻟَﻌِﻘﯿَﻘِﺔ‬ . ‫اﻟَﻬْﺪ ُي َﻣﺎ ﯾُ ْﻬَﺪى ﻟِﻠْ َﺤ َﺮِم ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻧََﻌٍﻢ َو َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه؛ ِﻷَﻧﱠُﻪ ﯾُ ْﻬَﺪى إِﻟَﻰ ا ﱠﷲِ ﺗََﻌﺎ َل ى‬ ‫َواﻷُ ْﺿ ِﺤﯿَُﺔ َﻣﺎ ﯾُْﺬﺑَ ُﺢ ِﻣ ْﻦ إِﺑِ ٍﻞ َوﺑَﻘَ ٍﺮ َو َﻏﻨٍَﻢ أَْﻫﻠِﯿﱠٍﺔ أَﯾﱠﺎَم اﻟﻨﱠ ْﺤ ِﺮ ﺑِ َﺴﺒَ ِﺐ اﻟِﻌْﯿِﺪ ﺗَﻘَ ﱡﺮﺑﺎً إِﻟَﻰ ا ﱠﷲِ ﺗََﻌﺎﻟَﻰ، َو ِﻫ َﻲ ُﺳﻨﱠٌﺔ‬ ‫ُﻣ َﺆﱠﻛَﺪٌة، َوﺗَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﺑِﺎﻟﻨﱡُﺬو ِر، َواﻷَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ إِﺑِ ٌﻞ ﻓَﺒَﻘَ ٌﺮ ﻓََﻐﻨٌَﻢ، َوَﻻ ﺗُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮ ِﻫ ﱠﻦ، َوﺗُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ َﺷﺎٌة َﻋ ْﻦ َوا ِﺣٍﺪ‬ ‫َوأَْﻫ ِﻞ ﺑَْﯿﺘِِﻪ َو ِﻋﯿَﺎﻟِِﻪ، َوﺑََﺪﻧٌَﺔ أَْو ﺑَﻘَ َﺮٌة َﻋ ْﻦ َﺳْﺒَﻌٍﺔ، َوﯾُ ْﻌﺘَﺒَ ُﺮ َذْﺑ ُﺤَﻬﺎ َﻋْﻨُﻬْﻢ، َو َﺷﺎٌة أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﺳْﺒ ِﻊ ﺑََﺪﻧٍَﺔ أَْو‬
. ‫ﺑَﻘَ َﺮٍة، َو َﺳْﺒ ُﻊ ِﺷﯿَﺎٍه أَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ِﻣ ْﻦ إِ ْﺣَﺪا ُﻫَﻢ ا‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ إِﱠﻻ َﺟَﺬ ُع َﺿْﺄ ٍن أَْو ﺛَﻨِ ﱡﻲ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه، ﻓَﺜَﻨِ ﱡﻲ إِﺑِ ٍﻞ َﻣﺎ ﻟَُﻪ َﺧ ْﻤ ُﺲ ِﺳﻨِﯿ َﻦ، َوﺛَﻨِ ﱡﻲ ﺑَﻘَ ٍﺮ َﻣﺎ ﻟَُﻪ َﺳﻨَﺘَﺎ ِن، َوَﻻ‬
. ‫ﺗُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ َﻫ ِﺰﯾﻠٌَﺔ َوﺑَﯿﱢﻨَُﺔ َﻋ َﻮ ٍر أَْو َﻋ َﺮ ٍج، َوَﻻ َذا ِﻫﺒَُﺔ اﻟﺜﱠﻨَﺎﯾَﺎ أَْو أَْﻛﺜَ ِﺮ أَُذﻧَِﻬﺎ أَْو ﻗَ ْﺮﻧَِﻪ ا‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ﻧَ ْﺤ ُﺮ إِﺑِ ٍﻞ ﻗَﺎﺋَِﻤًﺔ َﻣ ْﻌﻘُﻮﻟًَﺔ ﯾَُﺪ َﻫﺎ اﻟﯿُ ْﺴ َﺮى ﺑِﺄَ ْن ﯾَ ْﻄَﻌﻨََﻬﺎ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ َﻮ ْﻫَﺪِة ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ اﻟُﻌﻨُ ِﻖ َواﻟ ﱠﺼْﺪ ِر، َوَذْﺑ ُﺢ ﺑَﻘَ ٍﺮ‬ :ُ ‫َو َﻏﻨٍَﻢ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺟْﻨﺒَِﻬﺎ اﻷَْﯾ َﺴ ِﺮ ُﻣ َﻮ ﱠﺟَﻬًﺔ إِﻟَﻰ اﻟﻘِْﺒﻠَِﺔ، َوﯾُ َﺴﱢﻤﻲ ُو ُﺟﻮﺑﺎً ِﺣْﯿ َﻦ ﯾُ َﺤ ﱢﺮ ُك ﯾََﺪُه ﺑِﺎﻟﻔِ ْﻌ ِﻞ َوﯾَُﻜﺒﱢ ُﺮ َوﯾَﻘُﻮل‬
.َ ‫اﻟﻠﱠُﻬﱠﻢ َﻫَﺬا ِﻣْﻨ َﻚ َوﻟَﻚ‬

َ

َ

َ

ْ ََ َ َْ

ُ َ ُْ

‫َو َوْﻗ ُﺖ َذْﺑ ِﺢ أ ْﺿ ِﺤَﯿ ٍﺔ َو َﻫ ْﺪ ِي َﻧ ْﺬ ٍر أ ْو َﺗﻄﱡﻮ ٍع َو ُﻣْﺘ َﻌ ٍﺔ َوِﻗ َﺮا ٍن ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺑ ْﻌِﺪ أ ْﺳَﺒ ِﻖ َﺻَﻼِة اﻟ ِﻌﯿِﺪ ِﺑﺎﻟَﺒﻠِﺪ‬ ،‫أَ ْو َﻗ ْﺪ ِر َﻫﺎ ﻟِ َﻤ ْﻦ ﻟَ ْﻢ ُﯾ َﺼ ﱢﻞ، َﻓﺈِ ْن َﻓﺎَﺗ ْﺖ اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻼُة ِﺑﺎﻟ ﱠﺰ َوا ِل َذَﺑ َﺢ َﺑ ْﻌَﺪَه إِﻟَﻰ آ ِﺧ ِﺮ َﺛﺎِﻧﻲ اﻟﱠﺘ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ ِﻖ‬
.ِ ‫َو َوْﻗ ُﺖ َذْﺑ ِﺢ َﻫ ْﺪ ٍي َوا ِﺟ ٍﺐ ِﺑِﻔ ْﻌ ِﻞ َﻣ ْﺤ ُﻈﻮ ٍر ِﻣ ْﻦ ِﺣﯿِﻨﻪ‬
Distribution of Hady The hady is specified by saying, “this is a hady”, by a garland tie, or a blood-marking. The uḍḥiyah is specified by saying, “with this uḍḥiyah” or “for Allāh”, etc. It is not permitted to give the butcher his wages from it, though it is permitted as a gift or charity. No part of it, including its skin, is to be sold; rather, it is to be used. It is recommended to divide it into the following three parts: to eat, to give as a gift, and to distribute as charity. It is recommended to eat from the voluntary hady and uḍḥiyah,even if obligatory. It is also permitted for the mutʿah and qirān. It is obligatory to give what is defined as meat in charity, which is considered property of the impoverished and, thus, it is not enough to simply feed them. When the 10 begin, it is impermissible for those who are offering an uḍḥiyah (or having one offered on their behalf) to remove any hair, nails, or skin until the slaughter. It is recommended to shave afterward.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ِ‫َوَﯾَﺘ َﻌﱠﯿ ُﻦ َﻫ ْﺪ ٌي ِﺑَﻘ ْﻮﻟﻪ ِ: َﻫَﺬا َﻫ ْﺪ ٌي، أَ ْو ِﺑَﺘْﻘﻠِﯿِﺪِه أَ ْو إِ ْﺷ َﻌﺎ ِرِه، َوأُ ْﺿ ِﺤَﯿﺔ ٌ: ِﺑ َﻬِﺬِه أُ ْﺿ ِﺤَﯿٌﺔ أَ ْو ِﱠﷲ‬
.ِ ‫َوَﻧ ْﺤ ِﻮه‬ ‫َوَﻻ َﯾ ُﺠﻮ ُز إِ ْﻋ َﻄﺎ ُء اﻟَﺠﺎ ِز ِر أُ ْﺟ َﺮُﺗ ُﻪ ِﻣْﻨ َﻬﺎ، َوَﯾ ُﺠﻮ ُز َﻫِﺪﱠﯾ ًﺔ َو َﺻَﺪَﻗ ًﺔ، َوَﻻ ُﯾَﺒﺎ ُع ِﺟْﻠُﺪ َﻫﺎ، َوَﻻ‬
.ِ ‫َﺷ ْﻲٌء ِﻣْﻨ َﻬﺎ؛ َﺑ ْﻞ َﯾْﻨَﺘِﻔ ُﻊ ِﺑﻪ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ أَ ْن َﯾْﺄ ُﻛ َﻞ َوُﯾ ْﻬِﺪ َي َوَﯾَﺘ َﺼﱠﺪ َق أَْﺛَﻼﺛﺎً، َوأَ ْن َﯾْﺄ ُﻛ َﻞ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻫ ْﺪِﯾ ِﻪ اﻟﱠﺘ َﻄ ُﻮ ِع، َو ِﻣ ْﻦ أُ ْﺿ ِﺤَﯿِﺘ ِﻪ َوﻟَ ْﻮ‬ ‫َوا ِﺟَﺒٌﺔ، َوَﯾ ُﺠﻮ ُز ِﻣ ْﻦ اﻟ ُﻤْﺘ َﻌ ِﺔ َواﻟِﻘ َﺮا ِن، َوَﯾ ِﺠ ُﺐ أَ ْن َﯾَﺘ َﺼﱠﺪ َق ِﺑ َﻤﺎ َﯾَﻘ ُﻊ َﻋﻠَْﯿ ِﻪ ا ْﺳُﻢ اﻟﻠﱠ ْﺤِﻢ، َوُﯾ ْﻌَﺘَﺒ ُﺮ‬
.ُ ‫َﺗ ْﻤﻠِﯿ ٌﻚ ﻟِْﻠَﻔِﻘﯿ ِﺮ، َﻓَﻼ َﯾ ْﻜِﻔﻲ إِ ْﻃ َﻌﺎ ُﻣﻪ‬ ‫َوإَِذا َد َﺧ َﻞ اﻟ َﻌ ْﺸ ُﺮ َﺣ ُﺮَم َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻣ ْﻦ ُﯾ َﻀ ﱢﺤﻲ أَ ْو ُﯾ َﻀ ﱠﺤﻰ َﻋْﻨ ُﻪ أَ ْﺧُﺬ َﺷ ْﻲ ٍء ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺷ ْﻌ ِﺮِه أَ ْو ُﻇْﻔ ِﺮِه أَ ْو‬
.ُ ‫َﺑ َﺸ َﺮِﺗ ِﻪ إِﻟَﻰ اﻟﱠﺬْﺑ ِﺢ، َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ َﺣْﻠ ٌﻖ َﺑ ْﻌَﺪه‬

ʿAqīqah The ʿaqīqah is an emphasized recommended act for the father. For a boy, two sheep similar in age and appearance are offered. If both are unavailable, one will suffice. For a girl, one sheep is offered. A she-camel or cow will not suffice, unless offered entirely and slaughtered on the seventh day after birth, on which the child should be named. If that opportunity is missed, then the 14 th , and then the 21 st if it is missed again. The following weeks after that are not to be considered.
Its bones are not to be broken. It is better to cook it and include something sweet. Its ruling is like the uḍḥiyah in regard to what is sufficient, recommended, and disliked, though its skin, head, and discarded remains can be sold to give their value in charity. If the time for an ʿaqīqah and uḍḥiyah coincide, one will suffice the other.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،‫ﺎ َو َﺷﺒَﻬﺎً، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ُﻋِﺪَم ﻓَ َﻮا ِﺣَﺪٌة‬‫َواﻟَﻌﻘِﯿﻘَُﺔ ُﺳﻨﱠٌﺔ ُﻣ َﺆﱠﻛَﺪٌة ﻓِﻲ َﺣ ﱢﻖ اﻷَ ِب، َو ِﻫ َﻲ َﻋ ْﻦ اﻟُﻐَﻼِم َﺷﺎﺗَﺎ ِن ُﻣﺘَﻘَﺎ ِرﺑَﺘَﺎ ِن ِﺳﻨ‬ ‫َو َﻋ ْﻦ اﻟ َﺠﺎ ِرﯾَِﺔ َﺷﺎٌة، َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ ﺑََﺪﻧٌَﺔ أَْو ﺑَﻘَ َﺮٌة إِﱠﻻ َﻛﺎِﻣﻠًَﺔ ﺗُْﺬﺑَ ُﺢ ﻓِﻲ َﺳﺎﺑِ ِﻊ ِوَﻻَدﺗِِﻪ َوﯾُ َﺴﱠﻤﻰ ﻓِﯿِﻪ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻓَﺎ َت‬
.َ ‫ﻓَﻔِﻲ أَ ْرﺑََﻌَﺔ َﻋ َﺸ َﺮ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﻓَﺎ َت ﻓَﻔِﻲ أَ َﺣٍﺪ َو ِﻋ ْﺸ ِﺮﯾ َﻦ، َوَﻻ ﺗُ ْﻌﺘَﺒَ ُﺮ اﻷَ َﺳﺎﺑِﯿـ ُﻊ ﺑَ ْﻌَﺪ َذﻟِﻚ‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﻜ َﺴ ُﺮ َﻋ ْﻈُﻤَﻬﺎ، َو َﻃْﺒ ُﺨَﻬﺎ أَْﻓ َﻀ َﻞ، َوﯾَُﻜﻮ ُن ِﻣْﻨَﻪ ﺑِ ُﺤﻠْ ٍﻮ، َو ُﺣ ْﻜُﻤَﻬﺎ َﻛﺄُ ْﺿ ِﺤﯿٍَﺔ ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ﯾُ ْﺠ ِﺰ ُئ َوﯾُ ْﺴﺘَ َﺤ ﱡﺐ‬ ‫َوﯾُ ْﻜ َﺮُه، ﻟَِﻜ ْﻦ ﯾُﺒَﺎ ُع ِﺟﻠٌْﺪ َو َرأْ ٌس َو َﺳ َﻮاﻗِ ُﻂ، َوﯾُﺘَ َﺼﱠﺪ ُق ﺑِﺜََﻤﻨِِﻪ، َوإِ ْن اﺗﱠﻔَ َﻖ َوْﻗ ُﺖ َﻋﻘِﯿﻘٍَﺔ َوأُ ْﺿ ِﺤﯿٍَﺔ أَ ْﺟ َﺰأَ ْت‬
. ‫إِ ْﺣَﺪا ُﻫَﻤﺎ َﻋ ْﻦ اﻷُ ْﺧ َﺮ ى‬
Military Service It is a communal obligation unless the enemy is present, has surrounded someone or their land, or there is a general mobilization upon which it becomes an individual obligation.
When it is already sufficiently fulfilled, it is an emphasized recommended act. It is not obligatory, except upon free healthy Muslim men of legal capacity. It is the most virtuous voluntary deed. Naval expeditions are preferred.
It is recommended to stand guard for at least one hour by manning the fortified borderline of combat; 40 days is a complete term. It is most preferred in the presence of severe fear and is better than residing in Makkah.

An insolvent debtor is not to voluntarily enlist without permission, acquired collateral, or a solvent guarantor; nor is someone with at least one of their parents, who is a free Muslim, to enlist without their permission.
It is not permitted for the Muslims to flee from an army that is twice their size even if it is one-on-two. If they are more than twice their size, it is permitted.
It is not permissible to kill children; women; hermaphrodites; priests; decrepit, old, or chronically ill men; or the blind who do not provide counsel for them and are not able to fight or abet.
Regarding captured free soldiers, the commander-in-chief must choose between execution, serfdom, releasing, or ransoming them in exchange for either a Muslim or wealth. It is obligatory that he makes the most appropriate choice and, if in doubt, execution is most suitable.
‫ِﻛﺘَﺎ ُب اﻟ ِﺠ َﻬﺎِد‬ .ٍ ‫ﻣﺎ ﻓَﻔَ ْﺮ ُض َﻋْﯿﻦ‬‫َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﻓَ ْﺮ ُض ِﻛﻔَﺎﯾٍَﺔ، إِﱠﻻ إَِذا َﺣ َﻀ َﺮُه أَْو َﺣ َﺼ َﺮُه أَْو ﺑَﻠََﺪَه َﻋُﺪ ٌو، أَْو َﻛﺎ َن اﻟﻨﱠﻔِﯿ ُﺮ َﻋﺎ‬ ‫َوﯾُ َﺴ ﱡﻦ ﺑِﺘَﺄَﱡﻛٍﺪ َﻣ َﻊ ﻗِﯿَﺎِم َﻣ ْﻦ ﯾَ ْﻜﻔِﻲ ﺑِِﻪ، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ إِﱠﻻ َﻋﻠَﻰ َذَﻛ ٍﺮ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ، ُﺣ ﱟﺮ، ُﻣَﻜﻠﱠ ٍﻒ، َﺻ ِﺤﯿ ٍﺢ، َوأَْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ‬
.ُ ‫ُﻣﺘَ َﻄ ﱠﻮ ٍع ﺑِِﻪ اﻟِﺠَﻬﺎُد، َو َﻏ ْﺰ ُو اﻟﺒَ ْﺤ ِﺮ أْﻓ َﻀﻞ‬ ‫َو ُﺳ ﱠﻦ ِرﺑَﺎ ٌط، َو ُﻫ َﻮ ﻟُُﺰوُم ﺛَ ْﻐ ٍﺮ ﻟِ ِﺠَﻬﺎٍد، َوﻟَْﻮ َﺳﺎ َﻋًﺔ، َوﺗََﻤﺎُﻣُﻪ أَ ْرﺑَُﻌﻮ َن ﯾَ ْﻮﻣﺎً، َوأَْﻓ َﻀﻠُُﻪ ﺑِﺄَ َﺷﱢﺪ َﺧ ْﻮ ٍف، َو ُﻫ َﻮ‬
.َ ‫أْﻓ َﻀ ُﻞ ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟَﻤﻘَﺎِم ﺑَِﻤّﻜﺔ‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾَﺘَ َﻄ ﱠﻮ ُع ﺑِِﻪ َﻣِﺪﯾ ٌﻦ َﻻ َوﻓَﺎَء ﻟَُﻪ، إِﱠﻻ َﻣ َﻊ إِْذ ٍن أَْو َر ْﻫ ٍﻦ ُﻣ ْﺤ ِﺮ ٍز أَْو َﻛﻔِﯿ ٍﻞ َﻣﻠِﻲٍء، َوَﻻ َﻣ ْﻦ أَ َﺣُﺪ أَﺑَ َﻮْﯾِﻪ ُﺣ ﱞﺮ‬
.ِ ‫ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٌِﻢ إِﱠﻻ ﺑِﺈِْذﻧِﻪ‬ .َ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺤ ﱡﻞ ﻟِﻠُْﻤ ْﺴﻠِِﻤﯿ َﻦ اﻟﻔِ َﺮا ُر ِﻣ ْﻦ ِﻣْﺜﻠَْﯿِﻬْﻢ َوﻟَْﻮ َوا ِﺣﺪاً ِﻣﻦ اْﺛﻨَْﯿ ِﻦ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن َزاُدوا َﻋﻠَﻰ ِﻣْﺜﻠَْﯿِﻬْﻢ َﺟﺎز‬ ‫َوَﻻ ﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز ﻗَْﺘ ُﻞ َﺻﺒِ ﱟﻲ، َوأُْﻧﺜَﻰ َو ُﺧْﻨﺜَﻰ، َو َرا َﻫ ٍﺐ، َو َﺷْﯿ ٍﺦ ﻓَﺎ ٍن، َو َزِﻣ ٍﻦ، َوأَ ْﻋَﻤﻰ، َﻻ َرأْ َي ﻟَُﻬْﻢ، َوﻟَْﻢ ﯾُﻘَﺎﺗِﻠُﻮا‬
.ِ ‫أَْو ﯾَ َﺤ ﱢﺮ ُﺿﻮا َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟﻘِﺘَﺎل‬ ‫َوﯾُ َﺨﯿﱠ ُﺮ اِﻹَﻣﺎُم ﻓِﻲ أَ ِﺳﯿ ٍﺮ ُﺣ ﱟﺮ ُﻣﻘَﺎﺗِ ٍﻞ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ ﻗَْﺘ ٍﻞ َو ِر ﱟق َوَﻣ ﱟﻦ َوﻓَِﺪاٍء ﺑُِﻤ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ أَْو ﺑَِﻤﺎ ٍل، َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ا ْﺧﺘِﯿَﺎ ُر‬
. ‫اﻷَ ْﺻﻠَ ِﺢ، ﻓَﺈِ ْن ﺗَ َﺮﱠدَد ﻧَ ْﻈ ُﺮُه، ﻓَﻘَْﺘ ٌﻞ أَْو َل ى‬
Recruitment & Spoils It is required that the commander-in-chief and the army purify their intentions for Allāh in their acts of obedience. At the time of expedition, he is obliged to enter a contract with the soldiers and their steeds and prohibit whoever is not suitable for war, including discouragers, alarmists,

intelligence agents, known hypocrites, inciters of civil unrest, children, and women (besides the elderly who serve as a water-bearers etc.).
It is impermissible to seek assistance from non-believers, except in dire need. He is to prevent his army from what is impermissible and from being occupied with commerce. He should prepare wages and gifts for the enduring soldiers and should seek counsel from the insightful.
Whoever kills a combatant during battle is allowed their spoils, which include clothing; jewelry; weaponry; his transport upon which he was fighting; and whatever is on it. His money, saddle, tent, and pack animal are considered war booty.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوﯾَﻠْ َﺰُم اِﻹَﻣﺎَم َواﻟَ ْﺠﯿ َﺶ إِ ْﺧَﻼ ُص اﻟﻨﱢﯿَِﺔ ِﱠﷲِ ﺗََﻌﺎﻟَﻰ ﻓِﻲ اﻟ ﱠﻄﺎ َﻋﺎ ِت، َو َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ِﻋْﻨَﺪ اﻟَﻤ ِﺴﯿ ِﺮ ﺗََﻌﺎ ُﻫُﺪ اﻟ ﱢﺮ َﺟﺎ ِل‬ ‫َواﻟ َﺨـْﯿ ِﻞ، َوَﻣْﻨ ُﻊ َﻣ ْﻦ َﻻ ﯾَ ْﺼﻠُ ُﺢ ﻟِﻠْ َﺤ ْﺮ ِب، َوُﻣ َﺨﱢﺬ ٍل َوُﻣ ْﺮ ِﺟ ٍﻒ، َوُﻣَﻜﺎﺗِ ٍﺐ ﺑِﺄَ ْﺧﺒَﺎ ِرﻧَﺎ َوَﻣ ْﻌ ُﺮو ٍف ﺑِﻨِﻔَﺎ ٍق، َو َراٍم‬
.ِ ‫ﺑَْﯿﻨَﻨَﺎ ﺑِﻔِﺘَ ٍﻦ، َو َﺻﺒِ ﱟﻲ َوﻧِ َﺴﺎٍء إِﱠﻻ َﻋ ُﺠﻮزاً ﻟِ َﺴْﻘ ِﻲ َﻣﺎٍء َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮه‬ ‫َوﯾَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم ا ْﺳﺘَِﻌﺎﻧٌَﺔ ﺑَِﻜﺎﻓِ ٍﺮ إِﱠﻻ ﻟِ َﻀ ُﺮو َرٍة، َوﯾَ ْﻤﻨَ ُﻊ َﺟْﯿ َﺸُﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻣ َﺤ ﱠﺮٍم، َوﺗَ َﺸﺎ ُﻏ ٍﻞ ﺑِﺘِ َﺠﺎ َرٍة، َوﯾَِﻌُﺪ اﻟ ﱠﺼﺎﺑِ َﺮ ﺑِﺄَ ْﺟ ٍﺮ‬
.ٍ ‫َوﻧَْﻔ ٍﻞ، َوﯾُ َﺸﺎ ِو ُر َذا َرأْي‬ ‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ ﻗَﺘَ َﻞ ﻗَﺘِﯿ ًﻼ ﻓِﻲ َﺣﺎﻟَِﺔ اﻟ َﺤ ْﺮ ِب ﻓَﻠَُﻪ َﺳﻠَﺒُُﻪ َو ُﻫ َﻮ َﻣﺎ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﺛِﯿَﺎ ٍب َو ُﺣﻠِ ّﻲ ٍ َو ِﺳَﻼ ٍح، َوَﻛَﺬا َداﺑَـﺘﱡُﻪ اﻟﱠﺘِﻲ‬
.ٌ ‫ﻗَﺎﺗَ َﻞ َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ، َوَﻣﺎ َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ، َوأَﱠﻣﺎ ﻧَﻔَﻘَﺘُُﻪ َو َر ْﺣﻠُُﻪ َو َﺧْﯿَﻤﺘُُﻪ َو َﺟﻨِﯿﺒُُﻪ ﻓََﻐﻨِﯿَﻤﺔ‬
Booty Booty is acquired in battle territories by laying hold of it. One-fifth of it is divided into five shares, given to the following: Allāh and His messenger (peace be upon him) (to be spent like fayʾ); the relatives i.e. the offspring of Hāshim and al-Mutṭ̣alib; the destitute orphan; the impoverished; and the wayfarer. The remainder is divided between anyone who attended the battle to fight etc. The foot soldiers are allotted one, the cavalrymen riding Arabian steeds are allotted three, while others are allotted two. Shares are not to be given for more than two steeds, nor for other riding beasts.
The following four prerequisites are required of whomever receives shares: puberty; sanity; freedom; and being male. If they do not meet even one prerequisite, they are given a paltry gift which is less than a share.
If a land is conquered in battle, the commander-in-chief is to choose between dividing it or endowing it to the Muslims via permanent land tax

collection from whoever owns it.
Whatever money is collected from a non-believer without fighting, e.g. jizyah [106] , land tax, 10% commerce tax from a ḥarbī [107] , half of that from a dhimī [108] , what they abandoned in fear, or that of the deceased with no inheritors is all fayʾ and to be spent to benefit the Muslim community.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ،‫َوﺗُ ْﻤﻠَ ُﻚ اﻟَﻐﻨِﯿَﻤُﺔ ﺑِﺎﻻِ ْﺳﺘِﯿَﻼِء َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ ﻓِﻲ َدا ِر اﻟ َﺤ ْﺮ ِب، ﻓَﯿُ ْﺠَﻌ ُﻞ ُﺧُﻤ ُﺴَﻬﺎ َﺧ ْﻤ َﺴَﺔ أَ ْﺳُﻬﻢ ٍ : ِﱠﷲِ َو َر ُﺳﻮﻟِِﻪ‬ ،‫ﯾُ ْﺼ َﺮ ُف َﻣ ْﺼ ِﺮ َف اﻟﻔَ ْﻲِء، َو َﺳ ْﻬٌﻢ ﻟَِﺬ ِوي اﻟﻘُ ْﺮﺑَﻰ َو ُﻫْﻢ ﺑَﻨُﻮ َﻫﺎ ِﺷـٍﻢ َواﻟُﻤ ﱠﻄﻠِ ِﺐ، َو َﺳ ْﻬٌﻢ ﻟِﻠْﯿَﺘَﺎَﻣﻰ اﻟﻔُﻘَ َﺮاِء‬ : ِ ‫َو َﺳ ْﻬٌﻢ ﻟِﻠَْﻤ َﺴﺎِﻛﯿ ِﻦ، َو َﺳ ْﻬٌﻢ ِﻷَْﺑﻨَﺎِء اﻟ ﱠﺴﺒِﯿ ِﻞ، ﺛُﱠﻢ ﯾُْﻘ ﱠﺴُﻢ اﻟﺒَﺎﻗِﻲ ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ َﻣ ْﻦ َﺷِﻬَﺪ اﻟ َﻮْﻗَﻌَﺔ ﻟِﻘَ ْﺼِﺪ ﻗِﺘَﺎ ٍل َوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮه‬ ‫ﻟِﻠْ ﱠﺮا ِﺟ ِﻞ َﺳ ْﻬٌﻢ، َوﻟِﻠْﻔَﺎ َر ِس َﻋﻠَﻰ ﻓَ َﺮ ٍس َﻋ َﺮﺑِ ﱟﻲ ﺛََﻼﺛٌَﺔ َو َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻏْﯿ ِﺮِه اْﺛﻨَﺎ ِن، َوَﻻ ﯾُ ْﺴِﻬُﻢ ِﻷَ ْﻛﺜَ َﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﻓَ َﺮ َﺳْﯿ ِﻦ َوَﻻ‬
.ِ ‫ﻟَِﻐْﯿ ِﺮ اﻟ َﺨـْﯿﻞ‬ ‫َو ُﺷ ِﺮ َط ﻓِﯿَﻤ ْﻦ ﯾُ ْﺴَﻬُﻢ ﻟَُﻪ أَ ْرﺑََﻌُﺔ ُﺷ ُﺮوط ٍ : اﻟﺒُﻠُﻮ ُغ، َواﻟَﻌْﻘ ُﻞ، َواﻟ ُﺤ ﱢﺮﯾﱠُﺔ، َواﻟﱡﺬُﻛﻮ َرة ُ . ﻓَﺈِ ْن ا ْﺧﺘَ ﱠﻞ َﺷ ْﺮ ٌط‬
.ِ ‫َر َﺿ َﺦ ﻟََﻪ َوﻟَْﻢ ﯾُ ْﺴِﻬْﻢ، َواﻟ ﱠﺮ ْﺿ ُﺦ اﻟَﻌ َﻄﺎُء ُدو َن اﻟ ﱠﺴ ْﻬﻢ‬ ً‫َوإَِذا ﻓَﺘَ ُﺤﻮا أَ ْرﺿﺎً ﺑِﺎﻟ ﱠﺴْﯿ ِﻒ ُﺧﯿﱢ َﺮ اِﻹَﻣﺎُم ﺑَْﯿ َﻦ ﻗَ ْﺴِﻤَﻬﺎ َو َوْﻗﻔَِﻬﺎ َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟُﻤ ْﺴﻠِِﻤﯿ َﻦ، َﺿﺎ ِرﺑﺎً َﻋﻠَْﯿَﻬﺎ َﺧ َﺮاﺟﺎ‬
.ِ ‫ُﻣ ْﺴﺘَِﻤﺮاً ﯾُ ْﺆ َﺧُﺬ ِﻣﱠﻤﻦ ِﻫ َﻲ ﻓِﻲ ﯾَِﺪه‬ ،‫َوَﻣﺎ أُ ِﺧَﺬ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﻣﺎ ِل ُﻣ ْﺸ ِﺮ ٍك ﺑَِﻼ ﻗِﺘَﺎ ٍل َﻛ ِﺠ ْﺰﯾٍَﺔ، َو َﺧ َﺮا ٍج، َو ُﻋ ْﺸ ِﺮ ﺗِ َﺠﺎ َرٍة ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟ َﺤ ْﺮﺑِ ﱢﻲ، َوﻧِ ْﺼﻔِِﻪ ِﻣﻦ اﻟﱢﺬِﻣ ﱢﻲ‬
.َ ‫َوَﻣﺎ ﺗَ َﺮُﻛﻮُه ﻓَ َﺰﻋﺎً، أَْو َﻋ ْﻦ َﻣﯿﱢ ٍﺖ َوَﻻ َوا ِر َث ﻟَُﻪ، ﻓَ ْﻲٌء، َوَﻣ ْﺼ ِﺮﻓُُﻪ ﻓِﻲ َﻣ َﺼﺎﻟِـ ِﺢ اﻟُﻤ ْﺴﻠِِﻤﯿﻦ‬
Pacts Pacts of protection are permitted with people who have a book, or something like a book, e.g. the Magians. The pact is not valid unless it is made by the ruler or his deputy.
It is obligatory if he is secure from their deceit and they conform to the following four rules: to willingly pay the jizyah, while they are humbled; to not mention Islām, except in a positive light; to refrain from doing anything that will bring about harm to the Muslims; and to apply the laws of Islām personally, financially, and as it pertains to dignity, (i.e. the legal penalty for what they have prohibited, like adultery, is applied but not for what they have permitted, like alcohol). The jizyah is not taken from a child, bondsman, woman, or the incapable destitute, etc.
They are required to distinguish themselves from the Muslims and are prohibited from riding steeds, carrying arms, and constructing buildings which tower over Muslims (even if they approve), which must be

demolished. The dhimī is liable for what is destroyed (unless they have purchased it from a Muslim) and it is not to be reconstructed tall, even if they collapse, unless a Muslim has constructed a home in their district that is shorter than their structures.
They are not permitted to construct churches, reconstruct them if they collapse, publicize evil, holidays, crosses, eating and drinking during the daylight of Ramaḍān, swine, raise their voices for the deceased, recite the Qurʾān, ring bells, publicize their book, or buy a copy of the Qurʾān, books of Islamic Law or Prophetic Tradition. The ruler must protect them and prevent whoever would harm them.
‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ .ِ ‫َوﯾَ ُﺠﻮ ُز َﻋْﻘُﺪ اﻟﱢﺬﱠﻣِﺔ ﻟَِﻤ ْﻦ ﻟَُﻪ ِﻛﺘَﺎ ٌب أَْو ِﺷْﺒَﻬُﺔ ِﻛﺘَﺎ ٍب َﻛﺎﻟَُﻤﺠﻮ ِس، َوَﻻ ﯾَ ِﺼ ﱡﺢ َﻋْﻘُﺪ َﻫﺎ إِﱠﻻ ِﻣ ْﻦ إَِﻣﺎٍم أَْو ﻧَﺎﺋِـﺒِﻪ‬ ‫َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ إِ ْن أَِﻣ َﻦ َﻣ ْﻜ َﺮ ُﻫْﻢ َواﻟْﺘَ َﺰُﻣﻮا ﻟَﻨَﺎ ﺑِﺄَ ْرﺑََﻌِﺔ أَ ْﺣَﻜﺎم ٍ: أَ ْن ﯾُ ْﻌ ُﻄﻮا اﻟ ِﺠ ْﺰﯾََﺔ َﻋ ْﻦ ﯾٍَﺪ َو ُﻫْﻢ َﺻﺎ ِﻏ ُﺮو َن، َوأَ ْن‬ ‫َﻻ ﯾَْﺬُﻛ ُﺮوا ِدﯾ َﻦ اﻹِ ْﺳَﻼِم إِﱠﻻ ﺑِ َﺨْﯿ ٍﺮ، َوأَ ْن َﻻ ﯾَْﻔَﻌﻠُﻮا َﻣﺎ ﻓِﯿِﻪ َﺿ َﺮ ٌر َﻋﻠَﻰ اﻟُﻤ ْﺴﻠِِﻤﯿ َﻦ، َوأَ ْن ﺗَ ْﺠ ِﺮ َي َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻬْﻢ‬ ‫أَ ْﺣَﻜﺎُم اﻹِ ْﺳَﻼِم ﻓِﻲ ﻧَْﻔ ٍﺲ َوَﻣﺎ ٍل َو ِﻋ ْﺮ ٍض َوإِﻗَﺎَﻣِﺔ َﺣﱟﺪ ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ﯾُ َﺤ ﱢﺮُﻣﻮﻧَُﻪ َﻛﺎﻟ ﱢﺰﻧَﺎ َﻻ ﻓِﯿَﻤﺎ ﯾُ َﺤﻠﱠﻮﻧَُﻪ َﻛﺎﻟ َﺨ ْﻤ ِﺮ، َوَﻻ‬
. ْ ‫ﺗُ ْﺆ َﺧُﺬ اﻟ ِﺠ ْﺰﯾَُﺔ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺻﺒِ ﱟﻲ َو َﻋْﺒٍﺪ َوا ْﻣ َﺮأٍَة َوﻓَﻘِﯿ ٍﺮ َﻋﺎ ِﺟ ٍﺰ َﻋْﻨَﻬﺎ ِوﻧَ ْﺤ ِﻮ ِﻫﻢ‬ ‫َوﯾَﻠ َﺰُﻣُﻬْﻢ اﻟﺘﱠ ْﻤﯿِﯿ ُﺰ َﻋ ْﻦ اﻟُﻤ ْﺴﻠِِﻤﯿ َﻦ، َوﯾُ ْﻤﻨَُﻌﻮ َن ِﻣ ْﻦ ُرُﻛﻮ ِب اﻟ َﺨـْﯿ ِﻞ، َو َﺣ ْﻤ ِﻞ اﻟ ﱢﺴ َﻼ ِح، َوﺗَ ْﻌﻠِﯿَِﺔ ﺑِﻨَﺎٍء َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ‬ ،‫وﻟﻮ َر ِﺿ َﻲ، َوﯾَ ِﺠ ُﺐ ﻧَْﻘ ُﻀُﻪ، َوﯾَ ْﻀَﻤ ُﻦ ِذﱢﻣ ﱞﻲ َﻣﺎ ﺗَﻠِ َﻒ ﺑِِﻪ َﻻ إِ ْن َﻣﻠَُﻜﻮُه ِﻣ ْﻦ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ، َوَﻻ ﯾَُﻌﺎُد َﻋﺎﻟِﯿًﺎ ﻟَْﻮ اْﻧَﻬَﺪَم‬
.ْ ‫َوَﻻ إِ ْن ﺑَﻨَﻰ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٌِﻢ َداراً ِﻋْﻨَﺪ ُﻫْﻢ ُدو َن ﺑِﻨَﺎﺋِِﻬﻢ‬ ‫َوِﻣ ْﻦ إِ ْﺣَﺪا ِث َﻛﻨَﺎﺋِ َﺲ، َوﺑِﻨَﺎِء َﻣﺎ اْﻧَﻬَﺪَم ِﻣْﻨَﻬﺎ، َوِﻣ ْﻦ إِ ْﻇَﻬﺎ ِر ُﻣْﻨَﻜ ٍﺮ َو ِﻋﯿٍﺪ َو َﺻﻠِﯿ ٍﺐ، َوأَْﻛ ٍﻞ َو ُﺷ ْﺮ ٍب ﻧََﻬﺎ َر‬ ،‫َرَﻣ َﻀﺎ َن، َو َﺧ ْﻤ ٍﺮ، َو ِﺧْﻨ ِﺰﯾ ٍﺮ، َو َرْﻓ ِﻊ َﺻﻮ ٍت َﻋﻠَﻰ َﻣﯿﱢ ٍﺖ، َوﻗِ َﺮاَءِة ﻗُ ْﺮآ ٍن، َوﻧَﺎﻗُﻮ ٍس، َو َﺟ ْﻬ ٍﺮ ﺑِِﻜﺘِﺎﺑِِﻬْﻢ‬
.ْ ‫َو ِﺷ َﺮاِء ُﻣ ْﺼ َﺤ ٍﻒ َوﻓِْﻘٍﻪ َو َﺣِﺪﯾ ٍﺚ، َو َﻋﻠَﻰ اِﻹَﻣﺎِم ِﺣْﻔ ُﻈُﻬْﻢ، َوَﻣْﻨ ُﻊ َﻣ ْﻦ ﯾُ ْﺆِذﯾِﻬﻢ‬
Breaking Pacts Whoever refuses to pay the jizyah, be humble, adhere to our law or fights us, commits adultery with a Muslim woman or lays with her under the banner of marriage, commits highway robbery, spies or houses a spy, mentions Allāh, His book, His religion, or His messenger (peace be upon him) in an evil way, transgresses a Muslim by killing them or causing them confusion in their faith will have their (but not their family’s) pact broken. The ruler must treat them like a captive combatant and choose what to do with them. Their wealth becomes fayʾ; however, it is impermissible to kill them if they accept Islām, even having cursed the Prophet (peace be upon him).
ٌَ

‫َﻓ ْﺼ ٌﻞ‬ ‫َوَﻣ ْﻦ أَﺑَﻰ ِﻣْﻨُﻬْﻢ ﺑَْﺬ َل اﻟ ِﺠ ْﺰﯾَِﺔ، أَْو اﻟ ﱠﺼَﻐﺎ َر، أَْو اﻟْﺘِ َﺰاَم ُﺣ ْﻜِﻤﻨِﺎ، أَْو ﻗَﺎﺗَﻠَﻨَﺎ أَْو َزﻧَﺎ ﺑُِﻤ ْﺴﻠَِﻤٍﺔ، أَْو أَ َﺻﺎﺑََﻬﺎ ﺑِﺎ ْﺳِﻢ‬ ‫ﻧَِﻜﺎ ٍح، أَْو ﻗَ َﻄ َﻊ اﻟ ﱠﻄ ِﺮﯾ َﻖ أَْو ﺗَ َﺠ ﱠﺴ َﺲ، أَْو آ َوى َﺟﺎ ُﺳﻮﺳﺎً، أ ْو َذَﻛ َﺮ ا ﱠﷲَ ﺗََﻌﺎﻟَﻰ َوِﻛﺘَﺎﺑَُﻪ، أ ْو ِدﯾﻨَُﻪ، أَْو َر ُﺳﻮﻟَُﻪ‬ ‫ﺑِ ُﺴﻮٍء، أَْو ﺗََﻌﱠﺪى َﻋﻠَﻰ ُﻣ ْﺴﻠٍِﻢ ﺑِﻘَْﺘ ٍﻞ أَْو ﻓِﺘَْﻨٍﺔ َﻋ ْﻦ ِدﯾﻨِِﻪ اْﻧﺘَﻘَ َﺾ َﻋ ْﻬُﺪُه ُدو َن ُذ ﱢرﯾﱠﺘِِﻪ، ﻓَﯿُ َﺨﯿﱠ ُﺮ اِﻹَﻣﺎُم ﻓِﯿِﻪ‬
‫َﻛﺎَﻷَ ِﺳﯿ ِﺮ اﻟ َﺤ ْﺮﺑِ ﱢﻲ، َوَﻣﺎﻟُُﻪ ﻓَ ْﻲٌء، ﻓَﯿَ ْﺤ ُﺮُم ﻗَْﺘﻠُُﻪ إِ ْن أَ ْﺳﻠََﻢ، َوﻟَْﻮ َﻛﺎ َن َﺳ ﱠﺐ اﻟﻨﱠﺒِ ﱠﻲ َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠﻢ َ.‬
‫‪Conclusion‬‬ ‫‪With the success and aid of Allāh, this is the last of what was easy to‬‬ ‫‪collect. All praise belongs to Allāh, the Lord of the worlds, and may‬‬ ‫,‪abundant peace and prayers be upon our leader Muḥammad, his family‬‬ ‫.‪and companions‬‬ ‫,‪In need of His Lord, The Sufficient Benefactor's pardon and forgiveness‬‬ ‫.‪Abu Abd Allāh ʿAbd al-Raḥmān b. Aḥmad b. Muḥammad b. Aḥmad b‬‬ ‫‪Muḥammad b. Muṣṭafā al-Ḥanbali al-Khalwati al-Qādiri, the resident of‬‬ ‫‪Aleppo from Damascus, may Allāh pardon his sins and cover his faults‬‬ ‫‪and those of his Muslim brothers, completed his work Monday afternoon‬‬ ‫‪on the 17th of Jumādā al-Ulā, 1159. May peace, pleasure, and prayers be‬‬ ‫.‪upon our leader Muḥammad, his family, and companions‬‬
‫َﺧﺎﺗَِﻤُﺔ اﻟِﻜﺘَﺎ ِب‬ ‫َو َﻫَﺬا آ ِﺧ ُﺮ َﻣﺎ ﺗَﯿَ ﱠﺴ َﺮ َﺟ ْﻤُﻌُﻪ ﺑِﺘَ ْﻮﻓِﯿ ِﻖ ا ﱠﷲِ ﺗََﻌﺎﻟَﻰ َوَﻣُﻌﻮﻧَﺘِِﻪ، َو َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺳﯿﱢِﺪﻧَﺎ َﻣ َﺤﱠﻤٍﺪ َو َﻋﻠَﻰ آﻟِِﻪ‬
‫َو َﺻ ْﺤﺒِِﻪ َو َﺳﻠﱠَﻢ ﺗَ ْﺴﻠِﯿﻤﺎً َﻛﺜِﯿﺮاً، َواﻟ َﺤ ْﻤُﺪ ِﱠﷲِ َر ﱢب اﻟَﻌﺎﻟَِﻤﯿﻦ َ.‬ ‫َوﻓَ َﺮ َغ ِﻣ ْﻦ ﺗَْﺄﻟِﯿﻔِِﻪ َﻛﺎﺗِﺒُُﻪ ﻓَﻘِﯿ ُﺮ اﻟَﻌْﻔ ِﻮ َواﻟُﻐْﻔ َﺮا ِن ِﻣ ْﻦ َرﺑﱢِﻪ اﻟَﻐﻨِ ﱢﻲ اﻟَﻤﻨﱠﺎن ِ : أَﺑُﻮ َﻋْﺒِﺪ ا ﱠﷲِ َﻋْﺒُﺪ اﻟ ﱠﺮ ْﺣَﻤ ِﻦ ْﺑ ُﻦ‬ ‫َﻋْﺒِﺪ ا ﱠﷲِ ْﺑ ِﻦ أَ ْﺣَﻤَﺪ ْﺑ ِﻦ ُﻣ َﺤﱠﻤٍﺪ ْﺑ ِﻦ أَ ْﺣَﻤَﺪ ْﺑ ِﻦ ُﻣ َﺤﱠﻤٍﺪ ْﺑ ِﻦ ُﻣ ْﺼ َﻄﻔَﻰ اﻟ َﺤْﻨﺒَﻠ ﱡﻲ َﻣْﺬ َﻫﺒﺎً، اﻟ َﺨﻠْ َﻮﺗ ﱡﻲ ﺛُﱠﻢ اﻟﻘَﺎِد ِر ﱡي‬ ‫َﻣ ْﺸ َﺮﺑﺎً، اﻟﱢﺪَﻣ ْﺸﻘِ ﱡﻲ َﻣ ْﻮﻟَِﺪاً، اﻟ َﺤﻠَﺒ ﱡﻲ َﻣ ْﺤﺘِﺪاً، َﻏﻔَ َﺮ ا ﱠﷲُ ﻟَُﻪ َﻣﺎ َﻛﺎ َن ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟﱡﺬﻧُﻮ ِب، َو َﺳﺘَ َﺮ َﻣﺎ َﺷﺎ َن ِﻣ َﻦ اﻟُﻌﯿُﻮ ِب،‬ ‫َوِﻹِ ْﺧ َﻮاﻧِِﻪ اﻟُﻤ ْﺴﻠِِﻤﯿ َﻦ، إِﻧﱠُﻪ أَْﻛ َﺮُم اﻷَ ْﻛ َﺮِﻣﯿ َﻦ، َوأَ ْر َﺣُﻢ اﻟ ﱠﺮا ِﺣِﻤﯿ َﻦ، َﻋ ْﺼ َﺮ اﻻِْﺛﻨَﯿ ِﻦ اﻟُﻤﺒَﺎ َر ِك اﻟ ﱠﺴﺎﺑِ َﻊ َﻋ َﺸ َﺮ ِﻣ ْﻦ‬ ‫ُﺟَﻤﺎَدى اﻷُوﻟَﻰ ِﻣ ْﻦ َﺳﻨَِﺔ ﺗِ ْﺴ ٍﻊ َو َﺧ ْﻤ ِﺴﯿ َﻦ َوِﻣﺎﺋٍَﺔ َوأَﻟْ ٍﻒ، َو َﺻﻠﱠﻰ ا ﱠﷲُ َﻋﻠَﻰ َﺳﯿﱢِﺪﻧَﺎ ُﻣ َﺤﱠﻤٍﺪ َو َﻋﻠَﻰ آﻟِِﻪ‬
‫َو َﺻ ْﺤﺒِِﻪ، َواﻟ ﱠﺴَﻼُم َواﻟ ﱢﺮ َﺿﺎ َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻪ َو َﻋﻠَْﯿِﻬْﻢ أَ ْﺟَﻤِﻌﯿﻦ َ.‬
‫‪Bibliography‬‬ ‫‪Al lafi, T., & Ababneh, H. (1995). The effect of the extract of the miswak‬‬
‫.‪(chewing sticks) used in Jordan and the Middle East on oral bacteria‬‬ ‫‪International Dental Journal , 218-222.‬‬

l-Bali, A. a.-R. (1997). Bidayat al-Abid wa Kifayat al-Zahid. Beirut: Dar alBasha'ir al-Islamiya.
l-Bali, A. a.-R. (2000). Bulugh al-Qasid Jull al-Maqasid. Beirut: Dar alBasha'ir al-Islamiyyah.
l-Bali, A. a.-R. (2002). Kashf al-Mukhadarat wa al-Riyad al-Muzharat. Beirut: Dar al-Basha'ir al-Islamiyyah.
l-Buhuti, M. Y. (1983). Kashshaf al-Qina' an Matn al-Iqna. Beirut: Alim alKutub.
l-Buhuti, M. Y. (1993). Daqa'iq Uli al-Naha li Sharh al-Muntaha. Beirut: Alim al-Kutub.
Ali, A. Y. (1946). The Holy Qur-an. Text, Translation and Commentary. Doha: Qatar National Printing Press.
l-Jawziyyah, M. A. (1991). I'lam al-Muwaqqi'in 'an Rabb al-'Alimin. Beirut: Dar al-Kutub al-Ilmiyah.
l-Karamy, M. Y. (2004). Dalil al-Talib li Nayl al-Ma'arib. Riyadh: Dar Tayyibah.
l-Kurdy, D. M.-D. (2005). al-Maqadir al-Shariyyah wa al-Ahkam alFiqhiyyah al-Mutaliqah biha. Cairo.
l-Maqdasi, A. A. (1968). Al-Mughni. Cairo: Maktabat al-Qahirah. l-Mardawi, A. a.-D. (1994). Al-Insaf fi Ma'rifat al-Rajih min al-Khilaf.
Cairo: Hajar. Bahjat, A. (2016). Nadhm al-Maqadir al-Shariah bil Wihdat al-Muasirah.
Madinah, KSA. ung, D. (2011). The Value of Agarwood: Reflections upon its use and history
in South Yemen. Germany: Universitätsbibliothel, Universität Heidelberg. Management of Acute Abnormal Uterine Bleeding in Nonpregnant Reproductive-Aged Women. (2013). The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists , 891-896. hilip Zeplin, M. M. (2016). Clitoral Hood Reduction. Aesthetic Surgery Journal , 36-37. Qalajy, M., & Hamid Qunaiby. (1988). Mu'jam Lughat al-Fuqaha'. Beirut: Dar al-Nafa'is. Qasim, A. a.-R. (1977). Hashiyat al-Rawd al-Murbi' Sharh Zad al-Mustaqni. Riyadh. Revenig, L., Leung, A., & Hsiao, W. (2014). Ejaculatory Physiology and Pathophysiology: Assessment and Treatment in Male Infertility.

Translational Andrology and Urology , 31-39. Uthaimeen, M. S. (2007). al-Sharh al-Mumti ala Zad al-Mustaqni. Cairo:
Dar Ibn al-Jawzy.
About the Translator May name is John Starling and I’m an alumnus of NCSU's Poole College of Management and the Islamic University of Madinah. I hold a master’s degree in Islamic Studies from the Islamic University of Minnesota and possesses traditional ijazahs in several subjects including Ḥanbali fiqh and have been awarded a general ijazah from Shaykh, Dr. Mutḷaq al-Jāsir with permission to narrate. I have been a student of the Islamic sciences and sought knowledge both formally and traditionally since 2001. Translating this work and other works of the Ḥanbali School is an honor of a lifetime. For that, all praise and thanks belong to Allāh the Mighty and Sublime. During the translation process, I managed to record a brief explanation of the text which I based on several ḥanbali works. These videos are available online. I look forward to your suggestions and corrections so that we, as sincere and loyal disciples, can best represent the works of our tradition. Join me online at hanbalidisciples.com where you will find other book titles, courses, how-to guides, and a growing repository of questions and answers according to the school.
[1] A state which prevents one from prayer, etc. [2] Synonym of najāsah. [3] The opposite of ṭāhir. [4] E very substance which is impermissible to handle, not due to it being sacred, regarded as filthy, or it being harmful to the body or mind. It is also defined as every substance which requires purification. [5] Such as drinking it to remove a lodged morsel of food to prevent choking to death.

[6] Approximately 191 liters or 50 US liquid gallons. [7] The direction of prayer. [8] A traditional toothbrush fashioned from the Arāk tree (Salvadora Persica) containing antibacterial qualities which may help control the formation and activity of dental plaque. [9] When the shadow appears to the east of its object i.e. moments after midday. [10] A medicinal eye-liner traditionally made from stibnite (Sb 2 S 3 ). [11] It is recommended to let the beard grow without trimming any of it... 'so long as it's lengthiness is not unpleasant'. It is impermissible to shave it but not sinful to trim whatever exceeds a fist length. [12] Circumcision refers to both the removal of a male’s foreskin and the extra skin above a woman’s vaginal-opening resembling a cockscomb e.g. partial hoodectomy, which should not be removed entirely and if health risks are too high, the obligation is voided. [13] Be it either the penis of a man or the vaginal opening of a woman. [14] The usage of ṭahūr water on the entire body in a specific manner. [15] Like retrograde ejaculation. [16] Appearing red in color. [17] All available water must be exhausted, even if for a partial purification, before tayummum can be made. [18] The container takes the same ruling as the alcohol it holds i.e. if it becomes ṭāhir, the container becomes ṭāhir and vice versa. [19] Because it is unknown to be najis. [20] The right to choose either one dinār or a half is like the choice of a traveler between completing the prayer or shortening it. [21] It is required from both participating parties. [22] To quietly utter the shahādatayn and then repeat them loudly totaling 19 phrases. [23] Everything which must be concealed during prayer. [24] The initial utterance of “Allāhu Akbar”. [25] The phrase, “as-salāmu alaykum wa raḥmatullāh”, which is said twice, preferably beginning on the right side. [26] The phrase, “Allāh listens to whom praise Him.” [27] The phrase, “Our Lord, to You belongs all praise.” [28] The phrase, “Glory to my Lord, The Exalted.” [29] A supplication made during Witr prayer. See the chapter of Recommended Prayers for details. [30] Ṣalāt al-layl/qiyām al-layl refer to voluntary prayers performed at night. [31] A two-rakʿah prayer performed before sitting in a masjid. [32] A two-rakʿah prayer performed upon completion of wuḍūʾ.

[33] A prayer performed when one is in need. [34] A prayer performed when seeking Allāh’s pardon. [35] The procession round the Kaʿbah. [36] In a row by themselves. [37] Approximately 85 US miles; 13 8 km. [38] By combining Ẓuhr and ʿAṣr in either Ẓuhr or ʿAṣr time and combing Maghrib and ʿIshāʾ in either Maghrib or ʿIshāʾ time. [39] Produce mud. [40] Combining and shortening are impermissible. [41] 5.31 US miles/8.43 km [42] From the above-mentioned categories. [43] Sūrat al-ʿAlā [44] Females should not utter the takbīr loudly, especially in the presence of men. [45] The 11 th , 12 th , and 13 th of Dhul-Ḥijjah. [46] Someone in the state of iḥrām. [47] The takbir i.e. saying Allāhu Akbar, is uttered twice like the adhān and not once or three times. [48] To gather in the masjid for remembrance and supplication. [49] Anyone permanently impermissible to marry. [50] To express any immediate contents. [51] Ziziphus Lotus; the leaves of which are ground and mixed in water to produce foam. [52] A fragrance derived from the dark aromatic resin of Agarwood. [53] A mixture of perfumes prepared specifically for the deceased which may include camphor, sandalwood, and calamus. [54] The izār (a skirt-like garment which covers from the waist down) is worn first, followed by the qamīṣ (a floor-length gown with long sleeves) is worn next, followed by a khimār (a veil which covers the head and is wrapped around under the chin). [55] Female medical staff, midwives, etc. [56] Tearfully lamenting with certain statements. [57] Wailing replete with lamentation or mentioning the good qualities of the deceased. [58] Imam Aḥmad mentioned that they always know their visitors, though this time is more stressed. [59] It is the right of specific wealth for specific people at a specific time. [60] The minimum amount of wealth (coupled with certain conditions) liable for zakāt. [61] Approximate dry measure of 145 L. [62] One wasq is equivalent to 122.2 kg (270 US lb.).

[63] One ṣāʿ is equivalent to 2036 g (4.5 US lb.). [64] One Iraqian pound is equivalent to 381.8 g. [65] One Damascan pound is equivalent to 5.93 g. [66] Respectively, 10%, 5%, and 7.5% [67] Approximately 61.08 kilograms (135 US pounds). [68] War booty acquired without military action. [69] Approximately 85 g. [70] Approximately 594 g. [71] A structure at the front of the masjid which indicates the direction of the qiblah. [72] ‘Eid al-Fitṛ [73] It is not permitted to prepay zakāt if the payment detracts from the niṣāb. [74] The ninth month of the Hijra calendar. [75] The eighth month of the Hijra calendar. [76] The tenth month of the Hijra calendar. [77] The intention must be specifically for Ramaḍān and not a mere obligatory fast. [78] Eating and drinking at night in preparation to fast the following day. [79] A traditional natural mastic gum with relatively no flavor. Chewing gum which dissolves during fasting hours is impermissible. [80] The first month of the Hijra calendar. [81] The seventh month of the Hijra calendar. [82] The fourth day of spring. [83] The 19 th day of fall. [84] The 11 th , 12 th , and 13 th of Dhul Ḥijjah. [85] Mutʿah and qirān and two different forms of ḥajj. Details to follow. [86] Besides repeating it or making it up. [87] The act of remaining sequestered in the masjid, if even for an hour, in a specific manner to perform acts of obedience. [88] The minaret cannot be outside the masjid. [89] Like seeing someone arrive on-time and saying, “Then you came at the decreed time, O Moses.” (TaHa 20:40) [90] Defined in the chapter entitled Iḥrām & Ḥajj Types. [91] The intention for ḥajj with ʿumrah. [92] Someone in the state of iḥrām. [93] Approximately 0.608 liters. [94] Someone performing tamattuʿ.

[95] Someone performing qirān. [96] The word ḍabʿ is often translated as hyena, a carnivorous beast of prey that possesses canine teeth, which fits the description of impermissible animals. The aardwolf, an extant species of the hyena, does possess canine teeth but is insectivorous and therefore does not scavenge or kill animals. It is most likely that the aardwolf is what is being referred to as it is not considered a carnivorous beast of prey. Further details can be found in the works of Ibn al-Qayyim such as Iʿlām al-Muwaqqiʿīn. [97] Maqām Ibrāhīm. [98] The ceremony of running seven times between Ṣafā and Marwah. [99] A small mountain in Muzdalifah, named as such due to it being a sign of ḥajj. [100] Located between Muzdalifah and Minā. [101] The 10 th of Dhul-Ḥijjah on which the pilgrims slaughter. [102] Staying at ʿArafah. [103] The intention is the same as slaughtering the sacrificial animal i.e. disengagement. [104] The time for slaughter is from the conclusion of ʿEīd prayer until the end of the second day after it. [105] Like someone who lives in a remote area where ʿEīd prayers are not offered. [106] Tax collected to secure their safety and residency in the Muslim lands. [107] Any non-Muslim that does not enjoy a pact, protection, or guarantee from the Muslim state. [108] Anyone who pays the jizyah and is required to adhere to the laws of Islām due to their acknowledged disbelief.

